

===== PAGE 1 =====
introduction
primer on emergence
conditions for emergence:
definition of emergence -> higher level properties coming into existence when multiple
separate components are scaled, eg. ant swarm
more is different -> individual behaviour might be unpredictable/same but when a lot of them
are scaled different global behaviour emerges, eg all ants travel in random directions but
overall they are able to move the object through the maze
less is more -> when we know that an emergent phenomenon exists, easier to use a higher
level theory that ignores microscopic details rather than use a lower dimension theory that
has millions of variables/data points, eg. each ants behaviour is harder to track but as a
colony it can be studied
LLM lit and scaling laws support certain abilities arising suddenly when neurons are scaled
to deep nns -> shows emergent behavior
questions: what is emergence, why it matters -> covered above, it matters as it leads to cost
saving by predicting easier higher level theory of generalisation and without it we would
have to observe the separate microscopic interactions and components rendering the
process tedious.
evidence for emergence -> new representations being formed, abstractions leading to
better efficiency
what is emergent though?? capabilities vs intelligence!! --> MAIN POINT: LLMs have
emergent capabilities but not intelligence
eg. calculator -> it can solve the engineered tasks that it was made for but cannot
intelligently form new capabilities.
1. same higher level theory is guaranteed for emergence to be there, coarse graining or
ignorance of less important features is key, eg given is molecular vs fluid dynamics
(local -> less effective vs global predictions-> more effective)
emergence claim = coarse graining (efficient selection) + compression of system (comes at
free cost as a result to energy minimization via less is more.
1. scaling: new capabilities become suddenly visible or a new internal organisation gets
formed due to either scaling data or compute
2. criticality: rapid changes are observed in the behaviour, the new formed organisation
changes its description to something else


===== PAGE 2 =====
types of emergence : knowledge in vs knowledge out
framework to analyse emergence
emergence through scaling
eg1. double descent - it occurs in large llms where loss first goes down then overfits and then
again goes down is said to be emergent in nature through scaling but even linear and
polynomial regression show the same phenomenon
hence not emergent
eg2. ON THE UNIVERSALITY OF NEURAL ENCODINGS IN CNNS paper - they show that the
peak of the double descent appears synonymously with the change in the internal
representations of the model where it starts to hold only important features and discards the
other ones -> finds a more novel base for representation learning.
therefore this is emergent as it shows -> scaling induces phase transition taking place due to
novel bases being discovered
emergence through compression
3. compression: the models internal representation is compressed to increase efficiency
4. novel bases: new methods for better representation learning are found.
5. generalisation: capabilities of solving a completely new task B emerging when training is
done on task A
knowledge out emergence: if a complex behaviour emerges from the local interactions of
multiple individual components for free. simple rule following at scale = completely different
behaviour is seen. eg. colony of ants moving food through an obstruction
knowledge in emergence: instead of simple rule following individual agents if the separate
entity is complex and are trained/evolved from the information present in the environment.
when these interact together a different type of emergence phenomenon is observed. eg
LLMs -> neurons interacting at different layers
main argument that is presented with scaling and emergence -> as you scale the data and
params there are discontinuous jumps observed in accuracy of certain tasks much like
phase transition compared with physical transitions of water, however they say this
comparison is unfair as we don't whether the jump is actually discontinuous in nature or just
appears so due to selection of that specific portion or task
with loss functions we are implicitly programming a certain property through scaling training
therefore it cannot be termed as emergent inherently.


===== PAGE 3 =====
eg1. othello gpt -> where the model creates a compressed internal world model and emergence
is claimed to refer to the creation of a coarse-grained internal representations. The problem with
this was however the internal wm formed was more like a "bag of heuristics" rather than having
a coherent latent space representation
therefore cannot be termed emergent
emergence through novel bases and manifolds
manifolds serve as an efficient data representation method and emergence in this context
would be having a newer elegant structures for these, however our limited understanding of
how LLMs actually build and utilise these structures for their efficiency leads us to ambiguity
and therefore any claims about this need more information for proper verification.
generalisation through emergence
emergence in its form can automatically give rise to generalisation over varied tasks through
the formation of coarse grained higher level theory, again though there exist multiple
frameworks to test the gaps of generalisation(VC dimension check, Probably Approximately
Correct framework etc.) but we don't have enough task specific internal mechanisms and data
to judge this fairly upon.
conclusions
emergence claims judgement summarised
a lot of claims are called emergence on the basis of the misinterpreted meaning and with
the number of variables that are included when we talk about the current LLMs are too
many (eg.parameters, non linear interactions between components, size of training data
etc.) hence for any specific claims the ability to actually place the finger on is limited and
therefore cannot be verified. Using the word hence requires a higher level of understanding
and must be done with more responsibility.
eg. 3 digit addition-> not possible on 8b, 12b but gets 80% acc on 175b
the current emergence definition in context of LLMs -> if they acquire sudden jump in
capabilities/accuracy through scaling data/compute/params etc.
this is not the correct definition of emergent and therefore we need a scientific
grounding of the word to avoid misinterpretation
double descent - it occurs in large llms where loss first goes down then overfits and then
again goes down is said to be emergent in nature through scaling but even linear and
polynomial regression show the same phenomenon
othello gpt -> where the model creates a compressed internal world model and emergence
is claimed to refer to the creation of a coarse-grained internal representations. The problem


===== PAGE 4 =====
to do
a nice experiment on the basis of this paper would be to give out an agent the constraints from
the paper for quantifying emergence then give it a /goal for searching through all the relevant
literature upto '26, a thorough output would depend on it checking through the criterias of
coarse-grained internal representations, compression, novel bases/manifolds, phase-transition-
like reorganization, causal use of the representation, and generalization in a check pass
manner.
with this was however the internal wm formed was more like a "bag of heuristics" rather
than having a coherent latent space representation, therefore not emergent
ON THE UNIVERSALITY OF NEURAL ENCODINGS IN CNNS paper - they show that the
peak of the double descent appears synonymously with the change in the internal
representations of the model where it starts to hold only important features and discards the
other ones -> finds a more novel base for representation learning.
therefore this is emergent as it shows -> scaling induces phase transition taking place due
to novel bases being discovered
the output: a list of the found works that qualify under the said constraints of emergence in
the paper and why (in a brief note format)
the input: codex with /goal + detailed AGENTS.md which forces the agent to check the abs
+ results first and then the mechanisms for evidence grounding and proper claim testing.
ambitious goal: under turn of events maybe an automated pipeline where every new
relevant paper gets passed through this sieve and added to a public community index which
can serve as reference for the community and researchers.