

===== PAGE 1 =====
A Theory for Emergence of Complex Skills in
Language Models
Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University∗
Anirudh Goyal
Google DeepMind
Abstract
A driver of current AI research is the fact that new skills emerge in language models
when their parameter set and training corpora are scaled up. This phenomenon
is poorly understood, and a mechanistic explanation via mathematical analysis of
gradient-based training seems difficult. The current paper takes a different approach,
analysing emergence using the famous (and empirical) Scaling Laws of LLMs and
a simple statistical framework. Contributions include: (a) A statistical framework
that relates cross-entropy loss of LLMs to competence on the basic skills that
underlie language tasks. (b) Mathematical analysis showing that the Scaling Laws
imply a strong form of inductive bias that allows the pre-trained model to learn very
efficiently. We informally call thisslingshot generalization since, naively viewed, it
appears to give competence levels at skills that violate usual generalization theory.
(c) A key example of slingshot generalization, that competence at “complex skills,”
which involve t-tuples of basic skills, emerges essentially at very similar scaling as
competence on the elementary skills themselves.
1 Introduction
As language models scale up, via an increase in both the number of parameters and the size of the
training datasets, they exhibit remarkable new behaviors Brown et al. [2020], Ganguli et al. [2022],
Srivastava et al. [2022], Wei et al. [2022] —this phenomenon is often termed emergence. Some
emergent properties were noticed by early model designers and have since been confirmed through
experiments with substantially larger models such as GPT Brown et al. [2020], OpenAI [2023],
PaLM Chowdhery et al. [2022] and PaLM-2 [Anil et al., 2023]. Ultimate forms of emergence are
in-context Learning Brown et al. [2020] and zero-shot learning, whereby the model can understand
task instructions given as part of its input and solve the task. Attempting to explain this range of
phenomena solely through a mathematical analysis of gradient-based training appears challenging,
and appears to call for new thinking.
The model exhibiting new “behaviors” upon deployment is also of obvious interest in discussions
about AI safety and alignment. A contrarian view downplaying such concerns is that all learned
behaviors were already present somewhere in the (massive) training corpus —the so-called “stochastic
parrots” view Bender et al. [2021].
The current paper introduces new frameworks to derive mathematical understanding of such phenom-
ena. But first we recall (well-known) challenges in such a line of inquiry.
1. The phenomenon is not well-defined! Quantifying emergence of new “skills” requires
formulating what “language skills” are, which is tricky. Formalizations using Probabilistic
Context-Free Grammars, Boolean logic, Combinatorial Categorial Grammars, Dependency
Grammars, Gricean theories, Frame Theory and Category Theory Chomsky [1957], Hippis-
ley and Stump [2017], Grice [1975], Steedman [1996], Coecke et al. [2010], Tannen [ed]
∗Work done while at Google DeepMind
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2307.15936v2  [cs.LG]  6 Nov 2023


===== PAGE 2 =====
capture essential aspects of this. But it seems difficult (perhaps impossible) to integrate all
of these into a single framework and connect it to statistical frameworks undelying LLMs,
namely, next-word prediction using cross-entropy loss.
2. Multiple skills tend to emerge roughly together. The theory has to explain how they are
connected.
3. Finally, the model appears capable of flexibly combining its various capabilities during
in-context learning. (See Appendix A.2 for examples.) Prior attempts to formalize “combi-
nations” got highly technical, e.g. involving category theory .
1.1 Our contributions
We introduce new types of mathematically rigorous —yet elementary—frameworks and analyses that
stay recognizably close to current statistical frameworks, and yet offer insights into above phenomena.
Since analysis of training and generalization has proved difficult, our theory assumesLLM Scaling
Laws, which are empirically relationships describing reduction in language modeling loss with model
scale. The “language distribution” is conceptualized as a distribution over finite pieces of text, called
text-pieces. The following are the key elements of the theory: (i) A framework for conceptualizing
skills. The theory assumes there exists a set of ground-truth skills and that text-pieces are generated
by an unknown process that takes random tuples of skills and converts them into a text-piece whose
comprehension requires those skills. This is best visualized as a bipartite graph (“skill graph”) with
skills on one side and text-pieces on the other. An edge (s, t) means that understanding of the
text-piece t requires applying skill s. (See Figure 1.) The framework assumes that “understanding”
of a text-piece is testable by simple multiple-choice (“cloze”) questions (see Section 3) inserted (by
another unknown process) into the text at test time. The model does not need to predict the content of
the questions —it only needs to predict the answer, and it is penalized for any incorrect guesses. (ii)
Statistical tasks associated with skills and skill-tuples: Having cast language understanding as ability
to answer cloze questions, we can define statistical tasks corresponding to “skills” and “skillk′-tuples”
as follows. “Competence” on the skill is a fraction between 0 and 1 corresponding to the model’s
success rate when presented with all cloze questions from text-piece selected randomly among all
text-pieces adjacent to the particular skill node. Competence in k′-tuple of skills where k′ ≥ 1 is
the ability to correctly answer cloze questions in a randomly selected text-piece that is connected to
all skills in the k′-tuple. (iii) How competencies evolve with scaling. Random graph theory is used
to give rates at which competencies in skills and skill-tuples improve with scaling. It is shown that
competence in skill-tuples improves almost as fast as that in individual skills. (Theorem 14.)
V2
t
Pieces 
of text 
t/uni223C/uni03BCV1
Skills
Figure 1: Skill Graph.
Poverty of the stimulus angle: Reasonable com-
petence at k′-tuples of skills is a simple example
of compositional generalization. The phrase
Poverty of the Stimulus is often used (Chomsky
[1988]) to highlight that humans apply linguistic
structures in new combinations. (See Section 2.)
A similar issue also arises in our setting. Our
analysis allows the set of skills to be almost as
large as the training corpus, which implies all
individual skills were likely to have been seen
during training. However, the number of k′-tuples of skills scales as the k′th power of the number
of skills, which is much larger than the size of the training corpus. Therefore if the model displays
competency on even 10% of the k′-tuples of skills then it must have somehow acquired competence
in k′-tuples that were not seen during training. If we think of the k′-tuple of skills as a “complex
skills” then we must conclude that the model (through some internal combinational process) has
acquired many such complex skills despite not having seen that combination in training data.
Potential conceptual frameworks for next-generation AI models: The ongoing reworking of
Language Models into AI agents is accompanied by a shift away from the old paradigm of simply
training a model to predict the next word in a text corpus. Instead, the “corpus” is a carefully
weighted/curated combination of data, which could include code, math/logical reasoning, images,
synthetic text, etc. Training could involve new kinds of losses. Our conceptual framework seems
applicable to these new settings, since it is agnostic about what “skills” and “text” are, and how they
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
compose. The analysis is also adaptable to prediction losses other than cross-entropy. For simplicity,
we choose to describe the framework in context of vanilla language modeling.
Paper organization: Section 2 provides a brief introduction to scaling laws, emergence, and
random bipartite graphs. Section 3 explores the connection between the reduction in excess cross-
entropy and learning. Sections 5 and 6 give concrete results about emergence of skills as a result of
scaling.
2 Preliminaries
Deep-learning based language models follows a statistical paradigm: occurrences of linguistic units
(say, words, sentences, paragraphs) are assumed to fit a statistical profile, and thus pieces of text
from a sufficiently large and diverse corpus are assumed to be samples from a probability distribution
Bengio et al. [2000]. Language models are trained to solve next-word-prediction tasks: Given, say,
the past 500 words2 in the text, predict the next word. Faced with such a task, humans may be able
to give many completions, and the modeling assumes that frequencies of these completions can be
modeled via probability. Thus the model M computes a probability PrM [wi+1 | w1w2 . . . wi] for all
possible words wi+1’s. The goodness of a model is computed by itscross entropy loss, which for a
sequence of words w1w2 . . . wt is:
ℓ(M ) = −
X
i
log Pr
M
[wi+1 | w1w2 . . . wi] (Cross Entropy) (1)
Models are trained by minimizing (via gradient descent) this training loss on a text corpus, and their
goodness is computed by their test loss—evaluating the same loss expression on a held-out text from
the same corpus. Often the training corpus is so large that the model trains only once (or a few times)
on each piece of text, and by the end, the test loss on held-out text is almost the same as the training
loss.
Scaling laws: These empirically-derived expressions describe how test cross entropy loss on held-
out data scales (in experiments) with number of model parameters (N) and size of the dataset (D)
Cortes et al. [1993], Hestness et al. [2017], Kaplan et al. [2020], Bahri et al. [2021]. For Chinchilla
models Hoffmann et al. [2022] the law is as follows:
L(N, D) = A + B
N 0.34 + C
D0.28 A = 1.61 B = 406.4 C = 410.7. (2)
Here the constants A, B, C in 2 hold only for the specific architecture and training strategy —even
the constant A depends upon the tokenization. This description of macro behavior using two basic
parameters —reminiscent of 2nd Law of Thermodynamics— will help us circumvent the need for
mechanistic understanding of training. Our theory will only rely upon the general form of the
equations, specifically, that the dependence is inverse polynomial in N, D. So it applies to other
frameworks of training (e.g., overtrained models Muennighoff et al. [2023]) where scaling laws have
also been found.
Emergence: Emergence refers to an interesting empirical phenomenon that as D, N are increased
together then the model’s performance (zero shot or few-shot) on abroad range of language tasks
improves in a correlated way. The improvement can appear as a quick transition when D, N are
plotted on a log scale (which is often the case) but it is now generally accepted that for most tasks
the performance improves gradually when D, N are scaled up. Thus the term slow emergence is
more correct. Furthermore, it is known that emergence happens at different rates for different tasks,
and is often quickest for tasks where the text is plausibly close to text found in training data Wei
et al. [2022]. Plenty of tasks are known that stump current models, and they usually tend to be very
different from what one would find in usual text corpora. See [Wei et al., 2022, Srivastava et al., 2022,
Schaeffer et al., 2023] for experimental results on emergence rates of the broad range of language
tasks. One might thus posit, with some justification from the above-mentioned studies, that the
emergence of skills arises from training on related tasks that were implicitly solved while solving
next-word prediction in the training dataset. This is indeed our starting point.
2Actual training involves breaking up words into smaller tokens, which allows a single model to handle all
human languages, math formulae, computer code, etc. For simplicity, our discussion will refer to “words.”
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Poverty of Stimulus with respect to skill combinations: Any expert who has conversed with
popular chat agents quickly discovers that at the very least they seem to flexibly solve tasks that
require combinations of simple skills. However, the number of k′-wise combinations of elementary
skills feels too large (say, with k′ = 4 and the number of elementary skills is in the tens of thousands)
for all of the combinations to even be present in the training dataset. In other words, if the model
indeed acquires ability to solve tasks involving t-tuples of skills, we are looking at the familiar
Poverty of the Stimulus issue3 which we return to in Section 5.1.1.
2.1 Cross-Entropy, Entropy, and Excess entropy
The conceptual framework underlying cross-entropy loss (1) is that there is a ground-truth (i.e.,
humans’) distribution for generating the next word, which assigns probabilitypi(w | w1w2 . . . wi) to
the event that the (i + 1)th word is w given that the previous words were w1w2 . . . wi. In interest of
compact notation we shorten pi(w | w1w2 . . . wi) to pi(w), Thus the entropy of the (i + 1)th word
X
w
pi(w) log 1
pi(w) (ENTROPY ) (3)
This entropy is an inherent property of language, due to existence of many possible choices human
writers can make for the next word. Given sequence w1w2 . . . wi the model has a probability
distribution q(w|w1w2 . . . wi) for the next word w. Extending our compact notation, we use qi(w)
as a shorthand for this. The cross-entropy loss of the model on the i + 1th word is log 1
q(wi+1), which
should be seen as an empirical estimate of
Ew∼pi()[log 1
q(w) ] (EXPECTED C -E LOSS ) (4)
KL divergence, also sometimes called excess entropy, is non-negative and defined as
KL(pi||qi) = Ew∼pi()[log pi(w)
qi(w) ] EXCESS ENTROPY (5)
Thus on a per-word basis we have:
EXPECTED C -E LOSS = ENTROPY + EXCESS ENTROPY (6)
Summing over the entire held out corpus, one obtains a similar estimate for the entire corpus. One
can make mild assumptions to the effect that the conditional probabilities pi(), qi() only depend only
on (say) the previous 103 words, whereas the corpus size M is much bigger, e.g., M ≫ 107. So the
corpus consists of a random walk of sorts, where every 104 words or so it switches to a different
portion of the language distribution. Under such assumptions the above relationship, which holds in
expectation at the word level, should hold fairly precisely at the corpus level.
Understanding the Scaling Law in terms of excess entropy: In (2) the A term captures the
entropy of language 4. No model, however good, can achieve lower cross-entropy loss than A
for large corpora. The second and third terms of (2) capture excess entropy, and they decrease
polynomially with N and D. For example when N, D are increased by a factor of 10 it reduces by
roughly (10)0.28 ≈ 2.
Section 3 will argue that reductions in excess entropy lead to improvements in model capabilities.
But note that there is no way to compute excess entropy using just the corpus. Relationship (6) shows
that estimating excess entropy requires knowing the inherent entropy of text, which requires humans
in the picture. It is not possible to look at the model’s cross-entropy loss on the ith word according to
(1) and know—without asking humans— how much is due to inherent cross-entropy and how much
is excess.
3Chomsky coined the phrase Poverty of the Stimulus to emphasize that babies do not have enough data to
learn language, and concluded that evolution must have led to a “universal grammar” that humans must be be
born with. In our framework, the language model (whose learning is initialized using Gaussian noise) also seems
to defy paucity of stimulus with respect to skill combinations.
4Here we’re assuming that as the model and data set size tend to infinity in tandem, the model will perfectly
learn the language distribution.
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
3 (Mis)understanding, Excess entropy, and Cloze Questions
Thinking about emergence and Scaling Laws, it is possible to get confused as follows: “When we
increase D from 1011 to 1012 then according to (2) this changes cross-entropy by a tiny amount. Why
does it lead to big changes in macroscopic behavior?” The flaw in this reasoning is that most of
the loss captures merely the inherent entropy of language (the A term in (2)). We argue now that
the model’s mistakes on downstream tasks (i.e., its misunderstandings) are captured by theexcess
entropy, which as noted in Section 2.1 reduces by a constant factor each time the model is scaled up
by an order of magnitude5
We illustrate using a classic example from Winograd [1971], which later inspired the Winograd
Schema Challenge(WSC) Levesque et al. [2012]:
The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because they feared
violence.
Here the pronoun they is ambiguous— grammar rules allow it to refer to either demonstrators or
city councilmen . Winograd pointed out that disambiguating it (i.e., anaphora resolution) requires
world knowledge that is unavailable in the text itself, namely that demonstrations can get violent, and
city councilmen don’t like violence.
A key idea in designing test-beds for language understanding such as WSC is the Cloze Procedure6,
popular also for testing language development in children Brown [2018]. To test the model’s
understanding of they in this sentence, we can append a prompt: Q. Who feared violence? .
This is followed by either a blank, or a choice of multiple answers: A. city councilmen. B.
demonstrators. For WSC examples, even though a human would be hundred percent sure of the
answer, language models circa 2016 were roughly 50/50 confused between the two options.
In the above example, the human is 100% certain of the answer, which implies their entropy here
is log 1, namely 0. However if the model is split 50-50 between the two options this implies it has
cross-entropy log 2, all of which is excess entropy! Given the frequency of ambiguous pronouns in
usual English, one concludes that a model that has not learned pronoun disambiguation will display
huge excess entropy at many places in surrounding text. Thus reductions in excess entropy (which
happen naturally due to scaling) will tend to squeeze out such errors. The rest of the paper tries to
make this intuition mathematically precise.
Of course, text corpora do not normally contain such artificial cloze questions. But one could imagine
that the model’s basic misunderstanding of the above type could, often, lead to prediction mistakes in
neighboring text. Our theory in Section 4 will assume that cloze questions can closely capture the
model’s misunderstanding.
4 Mathematical Framework
We give a mathematical framework for thinking about skills and how they might relate to language
comprehension tasks such as pronoun disambiguation. First, it is assumed that language comprehen-
sion involves a set of skills, though the theory will not need to know a precise list. (Scholars have
discovered and named thousands of skills. Well-trained transformers have undoubtedly discovered
many more that remain unnamed.) Next, the theory will assume scaling laws such as (2) and thus not
need to reason about training and generalization. Instead, it can reason directly about the model’s
behavior on the test distribution, i.e., the distribution from which the training data was drawn. We as-
5A recent empirical study Xia et al. [2023] also concludes with the finding that “language modeling perplexity
correlates well with few-shot in-context learning performance along the trajectory, regardless of model sizes.” At
the same time, it is known that two models with the same cross-entropy can differ somewhat in their performance
on language tasks.
6Cloze questions are multiple choice, which allows testing most language skills Brown et al. [2020]. Some
skills such as understanding of irony don’t lend themselves well to cloze-based testing since one of the multiple
choices already explains the joke. See Saunshi et al. [2021] for earlier use of Cloze prompts in developing a
theory of LLMs.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
sume this test distribution is structured as a long unordered list of text-pieces, each with an associated
measure7 Traditional cross-entropy loss is averaged using this associated measure.
Definition 1 (Text piece). The test corpus for the model is viewed as being divided into text-pieces,
each consisting of Ctest tokens. There is also a measureµ2() on these text-pieces, withµ2(t) denoting
the measure of text-piece t. The usual cross-entropy loss is computed by weighting text-pieces with
respect to this measure.
Now we make some assumptions. We assume that the model’s “comprehension” of a text piece is
testable via suitable cloze questions analogous to the Winograd example in Section 3. Specifically, we
assume that an (unknown) process CLOZE has been used to add such cloze questions to the text pieces
at test time. These are clearly-marked multiple-choice questions in simple English that the model has
to answer. Note that the training corpus did not contain such cloze questions, so this is a simple form
of distribution shift at test time. The prediction loss on cloze questions does not require predicting
the location or contents of the cloze question —it only requires selecting the correct answer to the
multiple-choice cloze question.
We allow the process CLOZE to tailor the questions to the model being tested. Thus the next
assumption is reasonable.
Assumption 2. [Cloze Sufficiency Assumption:] The pre-trained model’s average (multiclass)
prediction loss on Cloze questions — where the average is taken over the distribution of text
pieces– closely tracks (within a small multiplicative factor like 1.1) the excess cross-entropy of the
model on classical next-word prediction.
Note: As discussed in Section 3, if the cloze question is assumed to be perfectly answerable by a
human then any incorrect answers by the model can be interpreted analogously excess cross entropy.
Our assumption amounts to saying that mistakes on cloze questions closely capture the excess entropy
of the model as defined in (1). The next theorem, shows that there exists a set of cloze questions
(albeit fairly artificial) where the excess cross-entropy of the model’s answer tracks the overall excess
cross-entropy on next-word prediction.
Theorem 3. If a model’s excess entropy at theith place in text is ϵ then there is a cloze question with
binary answer such that the probability that the model answers it incorrectly is at most
√
2ϵ.
Proof. The proof involves Pinsker’s Inequality (wikipedia version) which relates variation distance
and KL divergence. As in Section 3 let pi() be the humans’ probability distribution for thei + 1th
word in the text piece and qi() be the model’s distribution. The probability that the human and the
model give different answers is the variation distance between the two distributions, which is the
maximum (over all subsets A of words) ofP
w∈A(pi(w) − qi(w)). Let Ai+1 denote the subset for
which the previous expression is maximised. The cloze question consists of replacing word wi+1
in the text with the question: Is the next word among the words listed in option (a) or in option (b),
where option (a) lists words in Ai+1 and (b) lists words in Ai+1. The theorem now follows from
Pinsker’s inequality.
4.1 Skills: A Statistical View
Language is assumed to have an underlying set S of skills. Every text-piece t has an associated set of
skills that are required for comprehending it. The theory allows this set of skills to be quite large —it
only needs to be (a fair bit) smaller than the number of text-pieces in the distribution (an enormous
number).
Definition 4 (skill graph). A skill graph is a bipartite graph (S, T, E) where nodes in S correspond
to skills, nodes in T correspond to text-pieces, and (s, t) is in the edge set E if “comprehending”
text-piece t (i.e., answering its associated cloze questions) requires using skill s. (See Figure 1)
It is important to realize that we are interested in quantifying the model’s competence on a skill.
For example, while the above definition assumes there the distribution of text-pieces includes those
7Text-pieces should be thought of as having a size between a paragraph to a few pages, drawn from a longer
corpus. To allow good prediction for the model, the text-piece could include ancillary text that preceded it the
longer corpus. The model need not do predictions for the words in this ancillary text but can use it to make
predictions on the text-piece.
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
whose comprehension requires the skill “anaphora resolution,” a language model (or even human
individuals!) will in general be unable to apply the skill correctly in all text pieces. Thus “competence
on anaphora resolution” is not 0/1 —instead it is quantified as the fraction of text-pieces associated
with this skill whose cloze questions were correctly answered by the model. Quantifying the success
rate of this (in other words, the model’s capabilities) is the goal of the rest of the paper.
The final element of our theory is that the skill-graph has random edges, as made precise in Defini-
tion 5. To understand why this makes sense, we recall Winograd’s example: The city councilmen
refused the demonstrators a permit because they feared violence. Winograd implicitly assumes that
the trickiest skill needed here is pronoun/anaphora resolution, but of course, applying that skill in this
context requires other skills: understanding of causality (i.e., interpretation of “because”) as well as
world knowledge about “city councilmen,” “permit,” “demonstrators,” etc. This example highlights
the fact that if we were to look at random text-pieces that require pronoun disambiguation, we would
encounter random real-world scenarios, whose comprehension requires very different set of skills.
Moreover, the scenarios (and hence the relevant skills) could have different probabilities of occurring
in the corpus.
For simplicity we assume that each text-piece requires exactly k skills for some k, and this set
was drawn by iid sampling from an underlying measure on the set of skills. (Thinking of k as a
random variable is natural but will not be considered here.) The next definition formalizes the above
framework in form of a skill cluster.
Definition 5 (Degree-k skill cluster). This is a skill graph (S, T, E) where the collection of text
pieces is generated by “nature” by applying the following process: pick a subset of k skills via
iid sampling from an underlying measure µ1 on skills, and then use a procedure GEN to create a
text-piece t whose comprehension requires these skills, as well as a measure µ2(t) associated8 with
this text piece t. Then nature uses process CLOZE to add cloze prompts to test comprehension on
t. The prediction loss on the text-piece is the cross-entropy loss on predicting the answers to the
cloze questions in it. The average prediction loss over all text-pieces is computed with respect to the
measure µ2(). We call the skill-graph thus produced a degree-k skill cluster.
Now we formalize a simple model of what the full text corpus looks like. More complicated extensions
of this framework (e.g., considering a hierarchy among corpora) are left for future work.
Definition 6. (Text corpus) The text corpus consists of many skill clusters (e.g., math, newspapers,
science, coding, etc.) (S, T1, E1), (S, T2, E2), . . . which share the same underlying set of skills S
but have disjoint sets of text-pieces T1, T2, . . . that are generated as in Definition 5.
Definition 5 allows us to define “competence on a skill” in the more familiar setting of statistical
learning theory, specifically by letting us associate a statistical task with it. The task involves
predicting answers to cloze questions in a sub-distribution of text pieces that contain that skill. Our
emergence theory will apply to the family of tasks of the next definition.
Definition 7 (Competence on Skills). In the setting of Definition 5, for each skill cluster and each
skill s ∈ S statistical task τs corresponding to s and this cluster is defined as follows. The learner is
given a text-piece created by sampling s1, . . . , sk−1 via iid sampling (k − 1) times from measure µ1,
and applying GEN and CLOZE to the skill-tuple (s, s1, . . . , sk−1) to convert it into a text piece t with
an associated measure µ2(t) (but the measure is re-scaled so that the total measure of the inputs to
this task τs is 1). The error rate of the model at the statistical tasks is the expected prediction loss on
text-pieces drawn from the above distribution. Since error rate is between 0 and 1, the competence
refers to (1 − error rate).
For every k′-tuple of skills (s1, s2, . . . , sk′) (where k′ ≤ k) the statistical task τs1,s2,...,sk′ corre-
sponding to that k’-tuple is similarly defined. The inputs to the task are generated by completing the
k′-tuple to a k-tuple ⃗ sby iid sampling of k − k′ additional skills from µ1 and then using GEN and
CLOZE to convert it into a text-piece.
Competence on the k′-tuple is defined just as above.
Note: The definition involves the k-tuple being picked by iid sampling from µ1 which, in principle,
allows a skill to be picked twice. However, the probability of picking the same skill twice scales
8Note that the measure on text-pieces has to have the correct marginals e.g., the µ2-measure of all text-pieces
containing a skill s is µ1(s). There are many measures satisfying this weak condition, since the number of text
pieces is way larger than the number of skills.
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
as O(1/|S|). Since the set of skills S is assumed to be large, the distribution is almost the same as
sampling distinct k-tuples of skills. The small difference of O(1/|S|) between the two methods will
not affect any of the random graph theory calculations.
To illustrate with an example, if comprehending a text-piece involves 5 skills, then that text-piece
will appear in 5 statistical tasks corresponding to individual skills,
 5
2

tasks corresponding to pairs
of skills, and so on. However, our method of measuring the loss incurred on these statistical
tasks implicitly assumes that if the model incorrectly answered this cloze question (i.e., it assigned
significant probability to the wrong answer), then that loss was incurred in all these statistical tasks.
This accounting is conservative —it ignores the possibility that a model could have perfect on skills
1 to 4 but still have incorrectly answered the cloze question because of, say, shaky understanding
of skill 5. But this conservative accounting has the significant benefit of obviating the need for
a mathematical formulation of what skills are, and what it means to combine skills —which is
unformulated, as earlier noted. In summary, Definition 7 can be thought of as a lower bound on the
model’s true “competence” individual skills. Note this notion of competence also does not capture
out-of-distribution generalization (i.e. predict well when the distribution of text pieces changes).
5 Analysis of Emergence (uniform cluster)
Having set up a framework for modeling skills and (via Assumption 2) connecting them to the
cross-entropy loss of the model, we have arrived at a core mathematical issue around emergence: As
the model’s excess cross entropy goes down (due to scaling), this improves the model’s performance
on cloze tasks inserted in the test stream. How does this improve competence on the skills as well as
on tuples of skills –in other words, performance on the associated cloze questions?
This section analyzes a simple setting where the test-stream consists of a single degree-k skill cluster,
and the skills are uniformly distributed and so are the text-pieces—in other words, the distributions
µ1 and µ2 in Definition 5 are uniform. Section 6 will extend the analysis to the general setting. The
calculations below only require the total number of skills to be much less than the support size of the
distribution of text—in other words, the set of skills can be extremely large.
Key Hurdle: We point out the naive but incorrect way to reason about this. Since each text piece is
connected to a random k-tuple of skills, say ⃗ s, one is tempted to reason about emergence via linearity
of expectations, specifically, the following relation about prediction loss, where “expectation” is just
average over text-pieces/skills with respect to their measure:
k · Et[loss(t)] = Es[failure rate of statistical task τs]. (Incorrect!) (7)
To see that this is incorrect, let Y be the subset of such text pieces where the model makes mistakes
on cloze questions. This Y depends upon the skill graph, and the unknown processes GEN and CLOZE
of Definition 5, which assign measure to text pieces in an unknown way that may introduce arbitrary
correlations. Since the model “saw” part of the test stream (namely, the portion corresponding to
training data) it has picked some information about the skill cluster. Thus at the end of training,
locations of errors in the test stream –i.e., the set Y — depend upon the skill-cluster, and since we lack
understanding of Y the analysis has to treat it as arbitrary. In other words, our analysis is allowed to
assume an upper bound on the test loss, but the text-pieces on which this loss occurs form an arbitrary
subset that depends upon the graph structure. In particular, (7) cannot be inferred. This is the key
mathematical hurdle and our proof will surmount it using random graph theory.
Let’s say the model makes a mistake on a text-piece if the total prediction loss on all the cloze-
questions of that text-piece is at least1/2 (which is the kind of error incurred if the incorrect answer is
chosen with noticeable probability on even a single cloze question). If the average cross-entropy loss
for the text-pieces is δ we conclude Y consists of at most 2δ fraction of text pieces. The following
result guarantees that statistical tasks corresponding to most skills do not assign significant probability
to text pieces in Y –in other words, the model has good performance on statistical tasks connected
with these skills. The theorem follows from (and is a simple rephrasing of) Lemma 15 in the appendix.
Theorem 8 (Basic). Let α, β, θ > 0, β > 1, αβ < 1, θ < 1 satisfy
H(θ) + kθ

H(βα) − βα log 1
α − (1 − βα) log( 1
1 − α )

< 0 (8)
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
and the distribution on skills and text pieces be uniform in the skill-cluster. Then irrespective of the
details of GEN and CLOZE processes, the following property holds for every subset Y of text pieces
that contains at least θ fraction of text pieces: at least 1 − α fraction of skills have at mostβθkN 1/N2
edges to Y (in other words, at most β times the number of edges a skill would be expected to have to
text-pieces in Y ).
Note that as the model is scaled up, θ will go down and the set Y containing erroneous answers
on cloze questions will shrink. Our analysis kicks in only once θ drops below 1. In terms of the
emergence phenomenon, this corresponds to first signs of improvement on downstream tasks once
the model’s loss drops below some threshold.
Since edges between a skill node s and set Y correspond to errors in the statistical task τs, Theorem 8
is giving an upper bound on the prediction error in statistical tasks corresponding to (1 − α) fraction
of skills.
Definition 9 (performance curve). The contour plot (i.e., the boundary) of the region of α, β
combinations satisfying Theorem 8 is called a performance curve and denoted C(k,θ). A performance
curve C is better than another curve C ′ if for every α, β on C there is a corresponding point (α, β′)
on C ′ for β′ > β .
Figure 5 gives performance curves, i.e., the contour plot of the set of α, β combinations satisfying
Theorem 8 for a given θ, k. The horizontal axis plots (1 − α) and the vertical axis plots βθ, so point
(0.8, 0.16) on a curve means at least 0.8 fraction of skills have at most 0.16 fraction of their edges in
the “error set” Y (hence 0.84 fraction of their edges are outside the error set). The emergence curves
shift down noticeably (i.e., imply emergence of more skills) as we increase k. The next lemma shows
this trend always holds; follows from the fact that H(θ)/θ is a decreasing function in the interval
(0, 1).
Lemma 10 (Monotonicity). If θ′ < θ then the performance curve for θ′, k lies below that for θ, k.
If k′ > k then the performance curve of θ, k′ lies below that for k, θ.
Figure 2: Performance Curves: Left plot has θ = 0 .1 and varies k = 2 , 4, 8, 16. Higher values of
k greatly improve performance (for k = 2 valid α, β did not exist). The right plot has k = 8 and
θ = 0 .05, 0.1, 0.2. Section 5.1.1 clarifies that it also describes the model’s performance curve for
t-tuples of skills for for θ = 0.05 and t = 1, 2, 4 respectively (e.g., blue curve for 4-tuples).
5.1 The tensorization argument
While the above method yields performance curves, better curves can be derived via a tensorization
argument. Consider the following k′-wise recombination operation on the test stream. First randomly
partition the test stream into subsets of size k′, and then concatenate the k′ text pieces within each
subset to create a larger piece of text that we refer to as a “k′-piece,” and whose measure is the sum
of the measures of the component test-pieces. All cloze questions for the old test-pieces are retained
and no new cloze questions are inserted. Clearly, if the error of the model per average text-piece was
δ, then the error per average b-piece is k′δ. However, each k′-piece is now using a random k′k-tuple
of skills. Importantly, this set of k′k skills consists of iid draws from the skill distribution. In other
words, Theorem 8 now becomes the following.
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
Corollary 11 (tensorization). In the same setting as Theorem 8, for integer k′ ∈ [2, 1/θ] the
conclusion of that theorem holds also for α, β pairs satisfying
H(k′θ) + kk′θ

H(βα) − βα log 1
α − (1 − βα) log( 1
1 − α )

< 0 (9)
Furthermore, if H(k′θ) < k ′H(θ) the emergence curve from this expression dominates that derived
from Theorem 8.
5.1.1 Emergence for k′-tuples of skills
Now we estimate the model’s emergence curve for statistical tasks corresponding to k′-tuples for
k′ ≤ k. The basic idea is to consider k′-tuples of skills as ‘composite-skills,’ and then re-do the
calculation.
2nd estimate (better): Consider the following k′-wise recombination operation on the test stream.
First randomly partition the test stream into subsets of size k′, and then concatenate the k′ text pieces
within each subset to create a larger piece of text that we refer to as a “k′-piece.” All cloze questions
for the old test-pieces are retained and no new cloze questions are inserted. Clearly, if the error of the
model per average text-piece was δ, then the error per average b-piece is k′δ. However, each k′-piece
is now using a random k′k-tuple of skills, which we can alternatively view as k random k′-tuples.
Thus viewing k′-tuples of skills as ‘composite skills’ we can use this as the skill set in the setting of
Theorem 8, which gives us an easy corollary quantifying the performance on tasks corresponding to
k′-tuples of skills.
Lemma 12 (Emergence for k′-tuples of skills). Consider the skill-graph (S′, T ′, E) where S′ consists
of all k′-tuples of skills, T ′ consists of k′-pieces, and E consists of (s′, t′) where s′ is a k′-tuple of
skills and t′ is a k′-piece where this tuple of skills is used. Let Y consist of θ fraction of k′-pieces.
Then for any α, β > 0, β > 1, αβ < 1 satisfying (12) there are at least 1 − α fraction of k′-tuples of
skills that have at most αβθθN 1 βθ fraction of their edges connected to Y .
The next corollary presents a somewhat surprising general principle that’s also hinted at in caption
of Figure 2. Assume (for simplicity) a Chinchilla-like scaling law that 10x up-scaling leads to
factor 2 reduction in excess entropy. If a model is considered to have reasonable performance
on individual skills at current scaling, then after further up-scaling of 10x one would see similar
reasonable performance on skill-pairs, and scaling up by yet another 10x after that will yield similar
reasonable performance on 4-tuples of skills, etc. Note that these are provable lower bounds on
performance gains—actual gains could be higher. Figure 2 illustrates the phenomenon.
Corollary 13. When the model M1 with loss δ is scaled up (e.g., as per equation (2)) so that the new
model M2 has loss δ/k ′, then the performance curve inferred by our method for k′-tuples of skills
using M2 is identical to the curve inferred for individual skills on model M1.
Proof. As noted above, a loss of δ still allows the model to make significant mistakes on 2δ fraction
of test pieces, which we denote by θ. Thus Theorem 8 describes the performance curve for skills.
Making the loss drop to δ/k ′ but creating k′-pieces makes the fraction of errors θ = 2δ again. (Note
that “error” now means an erroneous answer on any cloze question in the entire k′-piece —again,
this is a conservative definition of error.) Applying Lemma 12 we get the same emergence curve as
Theorem 8.
6 Emergence analysis with general measure on text and skills
Now we turn to analysis of the general setting of Definition 5 where text piece t has measure µ2(t)
and skill s has measure µ1(s). In this setup, our lemma statements (e.g., Lemma 15 as well as
the ones in Sections 5 and 5.1.1) hold —–the claim is the same but with cardinalities replaced by
measure!
Theorem 14 (Emergence of skills and k’-tuples of skills). Let Y be any subset of text pieces
consisting of text pieces with total measure θ, and every text-piece has measure substantially less
than θ. Let α, β > 0, β > 1, αβ < 1 satisfy
H(θ) + kθ(H(βα) − βα log 1
α − (1 − βα) log( 1
1 − α )) < 0 (10)
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
Then the measure of skills that have at most βθ fraction of their edges connected to Y is at least
1 − α.
For k′-tuples of skills the statement of Lemma 12 holds with the same modification of cardinality to
“measure. ”
Proof. The measure µ1 on skills is trivial to reason about by just replacing each skill s by a number
of copies that is proportional to µ1(s). This converts the measure to a uniform measure —specifically,
k iid draws from this uniform measure are equivalent to k iid draws from the µ1.
For the measure µ2(·) on texts, the above trick doesn’t work. Recall that a text-piece is connected
in the skill graph to a random k-tuple of skills. If we try to replace µ2() with a uniform measure by
replacing the text piece with identical copies, then these copies must still all connect to the same
subset of k skills —meaning these connections are correlated and not random. We need a more subtle
argument. The key part in the proof of Lemma 15 is where we choose random subset of text-pieces,
Y whose size is θ|T | and subset Z of skills of size α|S|, and then upper bound by () the expectation
of the event that the latter has more than αβθk fraction of its edges going to Y . In presence of
measure µ2() let’s pickY as follows: Independently pick text-pieces, choosing t with probability
θµ2(t). (Note: |Y | is tightly concentrated around θ|T |.) We still pick Z randomly as before. Then
we apply Jensen’s Inquality on the same calculation to end up with the same upper bound as before.
See Lemma 16 in the Appendix.
6.1 Extending theory to multiple clusters
Above we assumed a single skill cluster in the language. Real-life text might contain multiple
skill clusters. For example, standard corpora must contain a large skill cluster involving pieces of
“everyday” text pieces and a set of basic language skills and world knowledge needed to comprehend
them. Smaller clusters may correspond to specialized topics, e.g., finance, science, mathematical
reasoning, etc. We assume each piece of text appears in only one cluster but skills may appear
in different clusters. When each text-piece appears in a single cluster, the analysis of Section ??)
continues to apply. The overall loss is the weighted sum of measure of text in the individual clusters.
Thus overall reduction in loss will drive emergence within individual clusters. But lacking any
mechanistic insight, our theory cannot predict the rate at which loss decrease (and hence emergence)
happens within clusters. This pertains to the point made earlier in the paper about lack of detailed
study of scaling laws for different kinds of corpora, as well as for training on mixes of corpora.
We leave a more fine-grained analysis, including possibly allowing hierarchical structure in clusters,
for future work. As usual, simpler settings probably give the main insight.
7 Takeaways about skill emergence
It may be useful to note the following takeaways about skill emergence as per our theory.
1. How scaling improves competence on k′-tuples of skills: Theorem 14 and Corollary 13 implies
that the effect of reducing θ by a factor 2 (which as per scaling laws corresponds to roughly one order
of scaling up in model parameters) has the effect of raising competence on 2k′-tuples to at least the
same level as what it was on k′-tuples before scaling.
2. Effect of using “high quality” text: Theorem 8 shows that for a fixed prediction loss θ, using
higher k implies better emergence of skills. Since k is the number of skills being used in a single
text-piece, it intuitively measures how complex the text is —e.g., a college text would be expected to
have higher k than a primary school text. If the scaling law is same for both types of text (i.e., how θ
reduces from scaling) our theorem predicts that more complex text will be more effective at inducing
skills. This prediction generally matches experts’ intuition, although we are not aware of a study of
scaling laws that tries to separate out texts of different quality.
3. More frequent skills tend to reach competence level quicker than less frequent skills: This
effect is hidden in the proof of Theorem 14. Specifically, the proof reduces the case of skills appearing
with different frequencies in the corpus to the uniform case by replacing a skill node with a set of
nodes whose cardinality scales in proportion to the skill frequency. But note that by definition, the
competence on all copies of the same skill must be the same. Thus essentially the calculation says
that k′-tuples that include more frequent skills will tend to emerge faster.
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
4. Learning despite Paucity of stimulus. We discuss how the improvement of competence on
k′-tuple of skills (as discussed in item 1. above) leads to a paucity of stimulus situation. Suppose
we trained a language model with D tokens. After scaling by k orders of magnitude (i.e., increasing
dataset size to ck′
D tokens, where in the Chinchilla framework c is around 10) the performance on
k′-tuples of skills is as good as what the performance was on individual skills before the scaling.
Note that the number of k′ tuples of skills is around |S|k′
where S is the set of skills. This quickly
leads to paucity of stimulus for some fixed k′, specifically, if Dck′
≪ | S|k′
. We give an example
just for illustration. Suppose c = 10 and |S| = 10 4 and the model’s proficiency on individual skills
was considered good when it was trained with D = 10 10 tokens (roughly the dataset size for GPT-2
style models). Then a larger model trained with 10 trillion tokens ( 1013) – closer to the size of
corpora used in training today’s models– would display proficiency in most8-tuples of skills, despite
never not having seen most of those combinations in training (which we can be sure of because
1010 × 108 ≪ (104)8).
8 Conclusions
We have proposed a theoretical framework for understanding emergence of skills when language
models are scaled up. A key insight (see Figure 2) is that reduction in excess cross entropy loss drives
skill acquisition, together with the assumption that normal language —down to short paragraph level—
already utilizes multiple skills, mixed up randomly. Need for mechanistic insight is sidestepped using
Scaling Law, which quantifies a powerful inductive bias in pre-trained models. One concrete example
of this inductive bias is that in our framework proficiency in combinations of skills arises just as
naturally as proficiency in the individual skills themselves, and need not require seeing examples
of all (or even most) of these combinations in the training set. This has relevance to the ongoing
debate about the extent of “understanding” that current models have, and their ability to address novel
settings.
We hope the simplicity of our framework will also encourage further experimental and theoretical
study, including extensions to more general language skills such as generation and dialog; and
modeling inductive bias at a finer level than the Scaling Laws. (For example, what are the scaling
laws for interesting parts of language such as math or coding?) It is also possible that our theory
underestimates the rate of emergence, due to unknown mechanisms —e.g., having to do with workings
of transformers–that are left out in our theoretical framework.
The simple and statistical nature of our theory should be seen as a plus — it helps identify which
emergence phenomena should not be considered surprising, most notably emergence of competence
on skills as well as on their combinations. But it shares limitations with other statistical frameworks.
Competence is guaranteed only on text-pieces drawn from the data distribution, and governed by
usual ϵ-δ) guarantees — many skills as well as combinations of skills may not get learnt, and the
ones that do get learnt may incorrectly applied on some fraction of the data distribution. Nevertheless
we hope this inspires more thorough experimental study (our simple experiments give a starting
point) of whether or not current language models have capabilities that go beyond simple statistical
explanations. Empirical properties or phenomena that are not derivable in our framework (or its
natural extensions) may be of interest for AI alignment as well as better design and understanding of
language models.
Acknowledgements: We are very grateful to Jonah Brown-Cohen, Timothy Lillicrap and Melvin
Joshnson for many discussions that motivated us to improve the theory and its expositions. We thank
Boaz Barak, Rong Ge, Yuxi Liu, and Nikunj Saunshi for their feedback on the manuscript.
References
N Alon and J Spencer. The Probabilistic Method (4th Ed). Wiley, 2016.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, et al. Palm 2 technical report.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jared Kaplan, Jaehoon Lee, and Utkarsh Sharma. Explaining neural
scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06701, 2021.
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
Emily Bender, Timnit Gebru, Andrea McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchel. On the dangers
of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? FACCT, 2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language model.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 13, 2000.
HD Brown. Language Assessment: Principles and Classroom Practice (6th Ed). Pearson Education,
2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
N Chomsky. Syntactic Structures. Mouton & Co., 1957.
N Chomsky. Language and the problems of knowledge. MIT Press, 1988.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
B Coecke, M Sadrzadeh, and S Clark. Mathematical foundations for a compositional distributional
model of meaning. Lambek Festschrift. Linguistic Analysis, 36:345–384, 2010.
Corinna Cortes, Lawrence D Jackel, Sara Solla, Vladimir Vapnik, and John Denker. Learning curves:
Asymptotic values and rate of convergence. Advances in neural information processing systems, 6,
1993.
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom
Conerly, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, et al. Predictability and surprise in large
generative models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages
1747–1764, 2022.
H. P. Grice. Logic and conversation. Cole and Morgan, 1975.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
Md Patwary, Mostofa Ali, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
A Hippisley and G Stump. Cambridge Handbook of Morphology. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Hector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgenstern. The winograd schema challenge. In
Thirteenth international conference on the principles of knowledge representation and reasoning,
2012.
Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M. Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Aleksandra Piktus, Nouamane
Tazi, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin Raffel. Scaling data-constrained language models,
2023.
OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.
Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why language
models help solve downstream tasks. In ICLR 2021, 2021.
Ryan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language models
a mirage? ArXiv e-prints, April 2023.
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Mark Steedman. Surface Structure and Interpretation. MIT Press, 1996.
D Tannen (ed). Framing in Discourse. Oxford University Press, 1994.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
Terry Winograd. Procedures as a representation for data in a computer program for understanding nat-
ural language. Technical report, MASSACHUSETTS INST OF TECH CAMBRIDGE PROJECT
MAC, 1971.
Mengzhou Xia, Mikel Artetxe, Chunting Zhou, Xi Lin, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Danqi Chen, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Ves Stoyanov. Training trajectories of language models across scales. ArXiv
e-prints, May 2023.
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
A Appendix
A.1 Graphs of Emergence Phenomena
For context, we include some graphs of emergence of capabilities from Wei et al. [2022].
A.2 Example of current chatbots’ ability to combine skills
We find that current chatbots, including those in the public domain, can take a list of language skills
and produce text illustrating those skills. When the list includes harder (or less common) skills, this
ability declines. We include an illustrative example but a more thorough evaluation is left to future
work.
Human question: Please give me a a couple lines of text that illustrate all of the following language
understanding skills: Anaphora resolution, simple logical reasoning, simple understanding of physics,
and understanding of sentiment.
Model response: Sure! Here’s a couple of lines that illustrate the mentioned language understanding
skills:
"As the sun set, casting a warm glow over the horizon, John watched in awe. He couldn’t help but feel
a sense of tranquility wash over him, as if all his worries had melted away with the fading daylight."
Explanation:
• Anaphora resolution: The pronoun "he" in the second sentence refers back to the antecedent
"John" in the first sentence, resolving the anaphoric reference.
• Simple logical reasoning: The logical reasoning here is based on the cause and effect
relationship between the setting sun and John’s feeling of tranquility. The implied logical
connection suggests that the calming effect of the sunset is responsible for John’s serene
state of mind.
• Simple understanding of physics: The mention of the sun setting and casting a warm
glow over the horizon reflects a basic understanding of physics, as it relates to the natural
phenomena of the Earth’s rotation and the resulting visual effect.
• Understanding of sentiment: The phrase "a sense of tranquility" and the description of
John’s worries melting away indicate a positive sentiment associated with the experience.
The mention of John feeling awe and a sense of tranquility further emphasizes a positive
emotional state.
Human question: Okay. Can you change the above example to introduce the element of "hip-hop".
Model response: Certainly! Here’s an updated example that incorporates the element of "hip-hop":
"As the sun set, casting a warm glow over the city skyline, the rhythmic beats of hip-hop music filled
the air. John stood mesmerized, his body instinctively moving to the infectious grooves. He couldn’t
help but feel a surge of energy and joy, as if the music had unlocked a vibrant world within him."
Explanation:
• Anaphora resolution: The pronoun "he" in the second sentence still refers back to the
antecedent "John" in the first sentence, resolving the anaphoric reference.
• Simple logical reasoning: The logical connection here lies in the cause and effect relationship
between the hip-hop music and John’s feeling of energy and joy. The music’s rhythmic
beats and infectious grooves are responsible for his instinctive movement and the surge of
positive emotions he experiences.
• Simple understanding of physics: Although the example doesn’t directly mention physics,
the phrase "As the sun set, casting a warm glow over the city skyline" still implies the natural
phenomena of the sun’s descent and the resulting illumination of the environment.
• Understanding of sentiment: The introduction of hip-hop music adds a vibrant and energetic
sentiment to the example. John’s feeling of energy, joy, and being mesmerized by the music
reflects a positive sentiment associated with the hip-hop genre.
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
B Technical Theorems about Random Bipartite Graphs
The theory will need some facts about random bipartite graph (V1, V2, E) with Ni denoting |Vi|, and
N1 ≫ N2. When we say it has degree k, we mean that in E every vertex in N1 is connected to k
vertices in N2, where those k vertices are chosen i.i.d. with replacement. Recall that V1 corresponded
to text-pieces and V2 to skills in the main body of the paper.
The next lemma uses the famous Probabilistic Method Alon and Spencer [2016]. In this method,
one is trying to show that in a certain probability space, there are no bad outcomes. This is done
by letting W be an integer random variable denoting the number of bad outcomes that happened,
and showing that the E[W ] ≈ 0. Then it follows that W = 0 with probability at least 1 − E[W ].
Concretely, in the next Lemma W will be the number of “bad” set pairs (Y, Z) of a certain size that
violate the lemma.
Lemma 15. For every positive integerk and θ ∈ [0, 1] there are α, β > 0 such that αβ ≤ 1 and the
following holds with probability almost 1. For every Y ⊆ V1 of size θN1, there are at least (1 − α)
fraction of vertices in V2 each of which has at most βθD edges going to Y , where D = kN1/N2 is
the expected degree of a node in V2. The parameter values for which this occurs are specified by the
condition
H(θ) + kθ(H(βα) − βα log 1
α − (1 − βα) log( 1
1 − α )) < 0 (11)
Proof. For Y ⊆ V1, |Y | = θN1 and Z ⊆ V2, |Z| ≤ αN2 we say that (Y, Z) are bad if Z has at least
αβθkN 1 edges to Y . Let W denote the number of such Z’s. The expectation is upper bounded by
N2N1
 N2
αN2

×
 N1
θN1

×
 kθN1
βαkθN 1

× αβαθkN 1 × (1 − α)(1−βα)θkN1 (12)
For (12) to be ≪ 1 it suffices for its logarithm to be negative. By Stirling’s approximation
  N
tN

≤
2(H(t)+ϵN )N where H(t) = −t log t − (1 − t) log(1 − t) is the binary entropy function and ϵN goes
to zero rapidly as N → ∞. Applying this to (12) and taking logarithms, and assuming N2 ≪ N1,
we arrive at the condition (13) for large N1.
Note: Such arguments allow a fair bit of slop. The expectation was exponentially small, and then
we took its logarithm and then divided out by a large number, N1 to reach (11). Thus additional
polynomial factors in the expectation —such as N1N2 above— have no effect on asymptotics.
B.1 Analysis of “General Measure” case in Section 6
We give more details of the proof of Theorem 14 in Section 6. Again, we phrase it via a general
lemma about bipartite graph (V1, V2, E) where each vertex in V1 has edges to k random vertices in
V2. We use the shorthand Ni = |Vi|. As noted in proof of Theorem 14 it suffices to consider the case
when V2 has uniform measure and there is a general measure µ() on vertices of V1, namely µ(v1)
is nonnegative andP
v1∈V1 µ(v1) = 1 . The measure of an edge (v1, v2) is defined as µ(v1). We
assume all µ(v1) are sufficiently small.
The proof will use a discretization of the measure. We conceptually divide V1 (and hence also the set
of edges) into classes, where the ith class Ci consists of v1 such that µ(v1) ∈ [(1 +ϵ)−i−1, (1 +ϵ)−i)
for ϵ an arbitrarily small constant. We assume allµ(v1) are sufficiently small (meaning some large-ish
i0, class i is empty for i < i 0) and the number of nonempty levels is much smaller than N1. Thus
each class has reasonable size —say, much larger than N2, the number of skills—which allows the
asymptotic arguments appearing below to hold within each class. The above assumptions all seem
reasonable for the probability measure associated with text pieces, which should be fairly well spread
out.
Lemma 16 (Main). For every positive integerk and θ ∈ [0, 1] and α, β > 0 satisfying αβ ≤ 1 and
H(θ) + kθ(H(βα) − βα log 1
α − (1 − βα) log( 1
1 − α )) < 0 (13)
the following holds with probability almost 1 in the random bipartite graph (V1, V2, E) of degree k:
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
For every Y ⊆ V1 of total measure θ, there is a set of least (1 − α) fraction of vertices in V2 such
that for each v2 in this set, X
v1:(v1,v2)∈E,v2∈Y
µ(v1) ≤ βθ. (14)
Proof. Consider Y ⊆ V1 that has measure θ, and Z ⊆ V2 has size αN. We say (Y, Z) is bad if every
v2 ∈ Z fails condition (14). (Consequently, the measure of edges between Z and Y is at least αβθ.)
We will argue that in the random graph, the expected number of bad (Y, Z) is ≪ 1. In other words,
for any fixed measure µ with high probability the graph contains no bad (Y, Z). (As explained in the
note following Lemma 15, we can ignore the contribution to the expectation of Z’s that have size
< αN .)
For any fixed Y ⊆ V1 we denote Y ∩ Ci as Yi and let yi = |Yi|. If µ(Y ) = θ then the yi’s satisfy the
following X
i
yi(1 + ϵ)−i ∈ [θ, (1 + ϵ)θ]. (15)
For a fixed (Y, Z) let βi be such that the number of edges between Yi, Z is αβiyik. Then the
probability (over the choice of the random graph) that (Y, Z) is bad is at most:
Y
i
 kyi
αβikyi

(α)−αβikyi (1 − α)kyi(1−αβi) (16)
SinceP
i yi = |Y | and
  kyi
αβikyi

≈ 2H(αβi)kyi, the left hand side is an expression of type
Y
i
2kyi(H(αβi)−αβi log α
1−α +α log 1
1−α ).
Using first order optimality wrt yi’s, this is maxiized when allβi’s are equal. So for deriving an upper
bound it suffices to let all βi = β, which simplifies (16) to
Y
i
 kyi
αβky i

(α)−αβyi (1 − α)kyi(1−αβ) ≈ 2H(αβ)k|Y |(α)−αβ|Y |(1 − α)k|Y |(1−αβ). (17)
Now we finish the proof using reasoning similar to that in Lemma 15. The number of choices for
y1, y2, . . . ,isQ
i |Ci|, which is at most N P
1 where P is the number of classes.
For a fixed sequence of yi’s the number of setsY consistent with those intersections is
Y
i
|Ci|
yi

≈
Y
2H(yi).
Since yi’s satisfy(15) and H() is a concave function, this number is maximised when yi/|Ci| ∈
[θ, θ(1 + ϵ)], and hence the number of possible Y ’s is upper bounded by
Y
i
2H(θ|Ci|) = 2 H(θN1). (18)
By the union bound, the probability that there exists a Y such that (Y, Z) is bad is at most 2H(θ)N1
times (17) times (18). Since |Y | ≈ θN1 this completes the proof of Lemma 16.
17