

===== PAGE 1 =====
On the Measure of Intelligence
Franc ¸ois Chollet∗
Google, Inc.
fchollet@google.com
November 5, 2019
Abstract
To make deliberate progress towards more intelligent and more human-like artiﬁcial
systems, we need to be following an appropriate feedback signal: we need to be able to
deﬁne and evaluate intelligence in a way that enables comparisons between two systems,
as well as comparisons with humans. Over the past hundred years, there has been an abun-
dance of attempts to deﬁne and measure intelligence, across both the ﬁelds of psychology
and AI. We summarize and critically assess these deﬁnitions and evaluation approaches,
while making apparent the two historical conceptions of intelligence that have implicitly
guided them. We note that in practice, the contemporary AI community still gravitates to-
wards benchmarking intelligence by comparing the skill exhibited by AIs and humans at
speciﬁc tasks, such as board games and video games. We argue that solely measuring skill
at any given task falls short of measuring intelligence, because skill is heavily modulated
by prior knowledge and experience: unlimited priors or unlimited training data allow ex-
perimenters to “buy” arbitrary levels of skills for a system, in a way that masks the system’s
own generalization power. We then articulate a new formal deﬁnition of intelligence based
on Algorithmic Information Theory, describing intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency
and highlighting the concepts of scope, generalization difﬁculty, priors, and experience, as
critical pieces to be accounted for in characterizing intelligent systems. Using this deﬁ-
nition, we propose a set of guidelines for what a general AI benchmark should look like.
Finally, we present a new benchmark closely following these guidelines, the Abstraction
and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), built upon an explicit set of priors designed to be as close as
possible to innate human priors. We argue that ARC can be used to measure a human-like
form of general ﬂuid intelligence and that it enables fair general intelligence comparisons
between AI systems and humans.
∗I thank Jos´e Hern´andez-Orallo, Julian Togelius, Christian Szegedy, and Martin Wicke for their valuable com-
ments on the draft of this document.
1
arXiv:1911.01547v2  [cs.AI]  25 Nov 2019


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents
I Context and history 3
I.1 Need for an actionable deﬁnition and measure of intelligence . . . . . . . . 3
I.2 Deﬁning intelligence: two divergent visions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
I.2.1 Intelligence as a collection of task-speciﬁc skills . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
I.2.2 Intelligence as a general learning ability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
I.3 AI evaluation: from measuring skills to measuring broad abilities . . . . . . 7
I.3.1 Skill-based, narrow AI evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
I.3.2 The spectrum of generalization: robustness, ﬂexibility, generality . . . 9
I.3.3 Measuring broad abilities and general intelligence: the psychometrics
perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
I.3.4 Integrating AI evaluation and psychometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
I.3.5 Current trends in broad AI evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
II A new perspective 18
II.1 Critical assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
II.1.1 Measuring the right thing: evaluating skill alone does not move us
forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
II.1.2 The meaning of generality: grounding the g factor . . . . . . . . . . . 20
II.1.3 Separating the innate from the acquired: insights from developmental
psychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
II.2 Deﬁning intelligence: a formal synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
II.2.1 Intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
II.2.2 Computation efﬁciency, time efﬁciency, energy efﬁciency, and risk ef-
ﬁciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
II.2.3 Practical implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
II.3 Evaluating intelligence in this light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
II.3.1 Fair comparisons between intelligent systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
II.3.2 What to expect of an ideal intelligence benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . 45
III A benchmark proposal: the ARC dataset 46
III.1 Description and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
III.1.1 What is ARC? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
III.1.2 Core Knowledge priors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
III.1.3 Key differences with psychometric intelligence tests . . . . . . . . . . 50
III.1.4 What a solution to ARC may look like, and what it would imply for AI
applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
III.2 Weaknesses and future reﬁnements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
III.3 Possible alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
III.3.1 Repurposing skill benchmarks to measure broad generalization . . . . 55
III.3.2 Open-ended adversarial or collaborative approaches . . . . . . . . . . 55
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
I Context and history
I.1 Need for an actionable deﬁnition and measure of intelligence
The promise of the ﬁeld of AI, spelled out explicitly at its inception in the 1950s and re-
peated countless times since, is to develop machines that possess intelligence comparable
to that of humans. But AI has since been falling short of its ideal: although we are able to
engineer systems that perform extremely well on speciﬁc tasks, they have still stark limi-
tations, being brittle, data-hungry, unable to make sense of situations that deviate slightly
from their training data or the assumptions of their creators, and unable to repurpose them-
selves to deal with novel tasks without signiﬁcant involvement from human researchers.
If the only successes of AI have been in developing narrow, task-speciﬁc systems, it
is perhaps because only within a very narrow and grounded context have we been able
to deﬁne our goal sufﬁciently precisely, and to measure progress in an actionable way.
Goal deﬁnitions and evaluation benchmarks are among the most potent drivers of scientiﬁc
progress. To make progress towards the promise of our ﬁeld, we need precise, quantitative
deﬁnitions and measures of intelligence – in particular human-like general intelligence.
These would not be merely deﬁnitions and measures meant to describe or characterize
intelligence, but precise, explanatory deﬁnitions meant to serve as a North Star, an objective
function showing the way towards a clear target, capable of acting as a reliable measure of
our progress and as a way to identify and highlight worthwhile new approaches that may
not be immediately applicable, and would otherwise be discounted.
For instance, common-sense dictionary deﬁnitions of intelligence may be useful to
make sure we are talking about the same concepts, but they are not useful for our pur-
pose, as they are not actionable, explanatory, or measurable. Similarly, the Turing Test
[91] and its many variants (e.g. Total Turing Test and Loebner Prize [75]) are not useful
as a driver of progress (and have in fact served as a red herring 1), since such tests com-
pletely opt out of objectively deﬁning and measuring intelligence, and instead outsource the
task to unreliable human judges who themselves do not have clear deﬁnitions or evaluation
protocols.
It is a testimony to the immaturity of our ﬁeld that the question of what we mean when
we talk about intelligence still doesn’t have a satisfying answer. What’s worse, very little
attention has been devoted to rigorously deﬁning it or benchmarking our progress towards
it. Legg and Hutter noted in a 2007 survey of intelligence deﬁnitions and evaluation meth-
ods [53]: “to the best of our knowledge, no general survey of tests and deﬁnitions has been
published”. A decade later, in 2017, Hern ´andez-Orallo released an extensive survey of
evaluation methods [36] as well as a comprehensive book on AI evaluation [37]. Results
and recommendations from both of these efforts have since been largely ignored by the
community.
We believe this lack of attention is a mistake, as the absence of widely-accepted ex-
1Turing’s imitation game was largely meant as an argumentative device in a philosophical discussion, not as a
literal test of intelligence. Mistaking it for a test representative of the goal of the ﬁeld of AI has been an ongoing
problem.
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
plicit deﬁnitions has been substituted with implicit deﬁnitions and biases that stretch back
decades. Though invisible, these biases are still structuring many research efforts today, as
illustrated by our ﬁeld’s ongoing fascination with outperforming humans at board games or
video games (a trend we discuss in I.3.5 and II.1). The goal of this document is to point
out the implicit assumptions our ﬁeld has been working from, correct some of its most
salient biases, and provide an actionable formal deﬁnition and measurement benchmark for
human-like general intelligence, leveraging modern insight from developmental cognitive
psychology.
I.2 Deﬁning intelligence: two divergent visions
Looked at in one way, everyone knows what
intelligence is; looked at in another way, no
one does.
Robert J. Sternberg, 2000
Many formal and informal deﬁnitions of intelligence have been proposed over the past
few decades, although there is no existing scientiﬁc consensus around any single deﬁnition.
Sternberg & Detterman noted in 1986 [87] that when two dozen prominent psychologists
were asked to deﬁne intelligence, they all gave somewhat divergent answers. In the context
of AI research, Legg and Hutter [53] summarized in 2007 no fewer than 70 deﬁnitions from
the literature into a single statement: “Intelligence measures an agent’s ability to achieve
goals in a wide range of environments. ”
This summary points to two characterizations, which are nearly universally – but of-
ten separately – found in deﬁnitions of intelligence: one with an emphasis on task-speciﬁc
skill (“achieving goals” ), and one focused on generality and adaptation ( “in a wide range
of environments”). In this view, an intelligent agent would achieve high skill across many
different tasks (for instance, achieving high scores across many different video games). Im-
plicitly here, the tasks may not necessarily be known in advance: to truly achieve generality,
the agent would have to be able to learn to handle new tasks (skill acquisition).
These two characterizations map to Catell’s 1971 theory of ﬂuid and crystallized intel-
ligence (Gf-Gc) [13], which has become one of the pillars of the dominant theory of human
cognitive abilities, the Cattell-Horn-Caroll theory (CHC) [62]. They also relate closely to
two opposing views of the nature of the human mind that have been deeply inﬂuential in
cognitive science since the inception of the ﬁeld [85]: one view in which the mind is a
relatively static assembly of special-purpose mechanisms developed by evolution, only ca-
pable of learning what is it programmed to acquire, and another view in which the mind is
a general-purpose “blank slate” capable of turning arbitrary experience into knowledge and
skills, and that could be directed at any problem.
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
A central point of this document is to make explicit and critically assess this dual deﬁ-
nition that has been implicitly at the foundation of how we have been conceptualizing and
evaluating intelligence in the context of AI research: crystallized skill on one hand, skill-
acquisition ability on the other. Understanding this intellectual context and its ongoing
inﬂuence is a necessary step before we can propose a formal deﬁnition of intelligence from
a modern perspective.
I.2.1 Intelligence as a collection of task-speciﬁc skills
In the distant future I see open ﬁelds for far
more important researches. Psychology will be
based on a new foundation, that of the
necessary acquirement of each mental power
and capacity by gradation.
Charles Darwin, 1859
The evolutionary psychology view of human nature is that much of the human cognitive
function is the result of special-purpose adaptations that arose to solve speciﬁc problems
encountered by humans throughout their evolution (see e.g. [19, 74]) – an idea which orig-
inated with Darwin [21] and that coalesced in the 1960s and 1970s. Around the same time
that these ideas were gaining prominence in cognitive psychology, early AI researchers,
perhaps seeing in electronic computers an analogue of the mind, mainly gravitated towards
a view of intelligence as a set of static program-like routines, heavily relying on logical
operators, and storing learned knowledge in a database-like memory.
This vision of the mind as a wide collection of vertical, relatively static programs that
collectively implement “intelligence”, was most prominently endorsed by inﬂuential AI
pioneer Marvin Minsky (see e.g. The Society of Mind , 1986 [63]). This view gave rise
to deﬁnitions of intelligence and evaluation protocols for intelligence that are focused on
task-speciﬁc performance. This is perhaps best illustrated by Minsky’s 1968 deﬁnition of
AI: “AI is the science of making machines capable of performing tasks that would require
intelligence if done by humans” 2. It was then widely accepted within the AI community
that the “problem of intelligence” would be solved if only we could encode human skills
into formal rules and encode human knowledge into explicit databases.
This view of intelligence was once so dominant that “learning” (discounted as pure
memorization) was often not even mentioned at all in AI textbooks until the mid-1980s.
Even McCarthy, a rare advocate for generality in AI, believed that the key to achieving
generality was better knowledge bases [60]. This deﬁnition and evaluation philosophy
focused entirely on skill at narrow tasks normally handled by humans has led to a striking
2Note the lingering inﬂuence of the Turing Test.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
paradox, as pointed out by Hern´andez-Orallo [36] in his 2017 survey: the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence has been very successful in developing artiﬁcial systems that perform these
tasks without featuring intelligence, a trend that continues to this day.
I.2.2 Intelligence as a general learning ability
Presumably the child brain is something like a
notebook as one buys it from the stationer’s.
Rather little mechanism, and lots of blank
sheets.
Alan Turing, 1950
In contrast, a number of researchers have taken the position that intelligence lies in the
general ability to acquire new skills through learning; an ability that could be directed to a
wide range of previously unknown problems – perhaps even any problem at all. Contrast
Minsky’s task-focused deﬁnition of AI with the following one, paraphrased from McCarthy
[60] by Hern´andez-Orallo: “AI is the science and engineering of making machines do tasks
they have never seen and have not been prepared for beforehand”[36].
The notion that machines could acquire new skills through a learning process similar
to that of human children was initially laid out by Turing in his 1950 paper [91]. In 1958,
Friedberg noted astutely: “If we are ever to make a machine that will speak, understand
or translate human languages, solve mathematical problems with imagination, practice a
profession or direct an organization, either we must reduce these activities to a science so
exact that we can tell a machine precisely how to go about doing them or we must develop
a machine that can do things without being told precisely how” [26]. But although the
idea of generality through learning was given signiﬁcant consideration at the birth of the
ﬁeld, and has long been championed by pioneers like McCarthy and Papert, it lay largely
dormant until the resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s.
This view of intelligence echoes another long-standing conception of human nature
that has had a profound inﬂuence on the history of cognitive science, contrasting with the
evolutionary psychology perspective: Locke’s Tabula Rasa (blank slate), a vision of the
mind as a ﬂexible, adaptable, highly general process that turns experience into behavior,
knowledge, and skills. This conception of the human mind can be traced back to Aristotle
(De Anima, c. 350BC, perhaps the ﬁrst treatise of psychology [3]), was embraced and
popularized by Enlightenment thinkers such as Hobbes [42], Locke [56], and Rousseau
[78]. It has more recently found renewed vitality within cognitive psychology (e.g. [79])
and in AI via connectionism (e.g. [41]).
With the resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s, its rise to intellectual dominance
in the 2000s, and its peak as an intellectual quasi-monopoly in AI in the late 2010s via
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
Deep Learning, a connectionist-inspired Tabula Rasa is increasingly becoming the domi-
nant philosophical framework in which AI research is taking place. Many researchers are
implicitly conceptualizing the mind via the metaphor of a “randomly initialized neural net-
work” that starts blank and that derives its skills from “training data” – a cognitive fallacy
that echoes early AI researchers a few decades prior who conceptualized the mind as a kind
of mainframe computer equipped with clever subroutines. We see the world through the
lens of the tools we are most familiar with.
Today, it is increasingly apparent that both of these views of the nature of human in-
telligence – either a collection of special-purpose programs or a general-purpose Tabula
Rasa – are likely incorrect, which we discuss in II.1.3, along with implications for artiﬁcial
intelligence.
I.3 AI evaluation: from measuring skills to measuring broad
abilities
These two conceptualizations of intelligence – along with many other intermediate views
combining elements from each side – have inﬂuenced a host of approaches for evaluating
intelligence in machines, in humans, and more rarely in both at the same time, which we
discuss below. Note that this document is not meant as an extensive survey of AI evaluation
methods – for such a survey, we recommend Hern ´andez-Orallo 2017 [37]. Other notable
previous surveys include Cohen and Howe 1988 [69] and Legg and Hutter 2007 [53].
I.3.1 Skill-based, narrow AI evaluation
In apparent accordance with Minsky’s goal for AI, the major successes of the ﬁeld have
been in building special-purpose systems capable of handling narrow, well-described tasks,
sometimes at above human-level performance. This success has been driven by perfor-
mance measures quantifying the skill of a system at a given task (e.g. how well an AI
plays chess, how well an image classiﬁer recognizes cats from dogs). There is no single,
formalized way to do skill-based evaluation. Historically successful approaches include:
• Human review: having human judges observe the system’s input-output response
and score it. This is the idea behind the Turing test and its variants. This evaluation
mode is rarely used in practice, due to being expensive, impossible to automate, and
subjective. Some human-facing AI systems (in particular commercial chatbots) use
it as one of multiple evaluation mechanics.
• White-box analysis: inspecting the implementation of the system to determine its
input-output response and score it. This is most relevant for algorithms solving a
fully-described task in a fully-described environment where all possible inputs can
be explicitly enumerated or described analytically (e.g. an algorithm that solves the
traveling salesman problem or that plays the game “Connect Four”), and would often
take the form of an optimality proof.
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
• Peer confrontation: having the system compete against either other AIs or humans.
This is the preferred mode of evaluation for player-versus-player games, such as
chess.
• Benchmarks: having the system produce outputs for a “test set” of inputs (or envi-
ronments) for which the desired outcome is known, and score the response.
Benchmarks in particular have been a major driver of progress in AI, because they are
reproducible (the test set is ﬁxed), fair (the test set is the same for everyone), scalable (it
is inexpensive to run the evaluation many times), easy to set up, and ﬂexible enough to be
applicable to a wide range of possible tasks. Benchmarks have often been most impactful
in the context of a competition between different research teams, such as the ILSVRC chal-
lenge for large-scale image recognition (ImageNet) [22] or the DARPA Grand Challenge
for autonomous driving [11]. A number of private and community-led initiatives have been
started on the premise that such benchmark-based competitions speed up progress (e.g.
Kaggle (kaggle.com), as well as academic alternatives such as ChaLearn (chalearn.org),
the Hutter prize, etc.), while some government organizations use competitions to deliber-
ately trigger technological breakthroughs (e.g. DARPA, NIST).
These successes demonstrate the importance of setting clear goals and adopting objec-
tive measures of performance that are shared across the research community . However,
optimizing for a single metric or set of metrics often leads to tradeoffs and shortcuts when
it comes to everything that isn’t being measured and optimized for (a well-known effect
on Kaggle, where winning models are often overly specialized for the speciﬁc benchmark
they won and cannot be deployed on real-world versions of the underlying problem). In the
case of AI, the focus on achieving task-speciﬁc performance while placing no conditions
on how the system arrives at this performance has led to systems that, despite performing
the target tasks well, largely do not feature the sort of human intelligence that the ﬁeld of
AI set out to build.
This has been interpreted by McCorduck as an “AI effect” where goalposts move every
time progress in AI is made: “every time somebody ﬁgured out how to make a computer
do somethingplay good checkers, solve simple but relatively informal problemsthere was
a chorus of critics to say, ‘that’s not thinking’ ” [61]. Similarly, Reed notes: “When we
know how a machine does something ‘intelligent’, it ceases to be regarded as intelligent.
If I beat the world’s chess champion, I’d be regarded as highly bright. ” [77]. This inter-
pretation arises from overly anthropocentric assumptions. As humans, we can only display
high skill at a speciﬁc task if we have the ability to efﬁciently acquire skills in general,
which corresponds to intelligence as characterized in II. No one is born knowing chess, or
predisposed speciﬁcally for playing chess. Thus, if a human plays chess at a high level,
we can safely assume that this person is intelligent, because we implicitly know that they
had to use their general intelligence to acquire this speciﬁcskill over their lifetime, which
reﬂects their general ability to acquire many other possible skills in the same way. But the
same assumption does not apply to a non-human system that does not arrive at competence
the way humans do. If intelligence lies in the process of acquiring skills, then there is
no task X such that skill at X demonstrates intelligence , unless X is actually a meta-task
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
involving skill-acquisition across a broad range of tasks. The “AI effect” characterization
is confusing the process of intelligence (such as the intelligence displayed by researchers
creating a chess-playing program) with the artifact produced by this process (the resulting
chess-playing program), due to these two concepts being fundamentally intertwined in the
case of humans. We discuss this further in II.1.
Task-speciﬁc performance is a perfectly appropriate and effective measure of success if
and only if handling the task as initially speciﬁed is the end goal of the system – in other
words, if our measure of performance captures exactly what we expect of the system. How-
ever, it is deﬁcient if we need systems that can show autonomy in handling situations that
the system creator did not plan for, that can dynamically adapt to changes in the task – or in
the context of the task – without further human intervention, or that can be repurposed for
other tasks. Meanwhile, robustness and ﬂexibility are increasingly being perceived as im-
portant requirements for certain broader subﬁelds of AI, such as L5 self-driving, domestic
robotics, or personal assistants; there is even increasing interest in generality itself (e.g. de-
velopmental robotics [4], artiﬁcial general intelligence [28]). This points to a need to move
beyond skill-based evaluation for such endeavours, and to ﬁnd ways to evaluate robustness
and ﬂexibility, especially in a cross-task setting, up to generality. But what do we really
mean when we talk about robustness, ﬂexibility, and generality?
I.3.2 The spectrum of generalization: robustness, ﬂexibility, generality
Even though such machines might do some
things as well as we do them, or perhaps even
better, they would inevitably fail in others,
which would reveal they were acting not
through understanding, but only from the
disposition of their organs.
Ren´e Descartes, 1637
The resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s has led to an interest in formally
deﬁning, measuring, and maximizing generalization. Generalization is a concept that pre-
dates machine learning, originally developed to characterize how well a statistical model
performs on inputs that were not part of its training data. In recent years, the success of
Deep Learning [52], as well as increasingly frequent run-ins with its limitations (see e.g.
[51, 16, 59]), have triggered renewed interest in generalization theory in the context of
machine learning (see e.g. [102, 67, 45, 70, 17, 49]). The notion of generalization can be
formally deﬁned in various contexts (in particular, statistical learning theory [92] provides a
widely-used formal deﬁnition that is relevant for machine learning, and we provide a more
general formalization in II.2). We can informally deﬁne “generalization” or “generalization
power” for any AI system to broadly mean “the ability to handle situations (or tasks) that
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
differ from previously encountered situations”.
The notion of “previously encountered situation” is somewhat ambiguous, so we should
distinguish between two types of generalization:
• System-centric generalization : this is the ability of a learning system to handle
situations it has not itself encountered before. The formal notion of generalization
error in statistical learning theory would belong here.
– For instance, if an engineer develops a machine learning classiﬁcation algorithm
and ﬁts it on a training set ofN samples, the “generalization” of this learning al-
gorithm would refer to its classiﬁcation error over images not part of the training
set.
– Note that the generalization power of this algorithm may be in part due to prior
knowledge injected by the developer of the system. This prior knowledge is
ignored by this measure of generalization.
• Developer-aware generalization: this is the ability of a system, either learning or
static, to handle situations that neither the system nor the developer of the system
have encountered before.
– For instance, if an engineer uses a “development set” of N samples to create a
static classiﬁcation algorithm that uses hard-coded heuristic rules, the “general-
ization” of this static algorithm would refer to its classiﬁcation error over images
not part of the “development set”.
– Note that “developer-aware generalization” is equivalent to “system-centric gen-
eralization” if we include the developer of the system as part of the system.
– Note that “developer-aware generalization” accounts for any prior knowledge
that the developer of the system has injected into it. “System-centric generaliza-
tion” does not.
In addition, we ﬁnd it useful to qualitatively deﬁnedegrees of generalizationfor information-
processing systems:
• Absence of generalization: The notion of generalization as we have informally de-
ﬁned above fundamentally relies on the related notions of novelty and uncertainty: a
system can only generalize to novel information that could not be known in advance
to either the system or its creator. AI systems in which there is no uncertainty do not
display generalization. For instance, a program that plays tic-tac-toe via exhaustive
iteration cannot be said to “generalize” to all board conﬁgurations. Likewise, a sort-
ing algorithm that is proven to be correct cannot be said to “generalize” to all lists of
integers, much like proven mathematical statements cannot be said to “generalize” to
all objects that match the assumptions of their proof 3.
3This is a distinct deﬁnition from “generalization” in mathematics, where “to generalize” means to extend the
scope of application of a statement by weakening its assumptions.
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
• Local generalization, or “robustness”: This is the ability of a system to handle new
points from a known distribution for a single task or a well-scoped set of known tasks,
given a sufﬁciently dense sampling of examples from the distribution (e.g. tolerance
to anticipated perturbations within a ﬁxed context). For instance, an image classiﬁer
that can distinguish previously unseen 150x150 RGB images containing cats from
those containing dogs, after being trained on many such labeled images, can be said
to perform local generalization. One could characterize it as “adaptation to known
unknowns within a single task or well-deﬁned set of tasks” . This is the form of
generalization that machine learning has been concerned with from the 1950s up to
this day.
• Broad generalization, or “ﬂexibility” : This is the ability of a system to handle a
broad category of tasks and environments without further human intervention. This
includes the ability to handle situations that could not have been foreseen by the
creators of the system. This could be considered to reﬂect human-level ability in
a single broad activity domain (e.g. household tasks, driving in the real world), and
could be characterized as“adaptation to unknown unknowns across a broad category
of related tasks”. For instance, a L5 self-driving vehicle, or a domestic robot capable
of passing Wozniak’s coffee cup test (entering a random kitchen and making a cup of
coffee) [99] could be said to display broad generalization. Arguably, even the most
advanced AI systems today do not belong in this category, although there is increasing
research interest in achieving this level.
• Extreme generalization: This describes open-ended systems with the ability to han-
dle entirely new tasks that only share abstract commonalities with previously encoun-
tered situations, applicable to any task and domain within a wide scope. This could
be characterized as “adaptation to unknown unknowns across an unknown range of
tasks and domains”. Biological forms of intelligence (humans and possibly other in-
telligent species) are the only example of such a system at this time. A version of
extreme generalization that is of particular interest to us throughout this document
is human-centric extreme generalization, which is the speciﬁc case where the scope
considered is the space of tasks and domains that ﬁt within the human experience. We
will refer to “human-centric extreme generalization” as “generality”. Importantly, as
we deliberately deﬁne generality here by using human cognition as a reference frame
(which we discuss in II.1.2), it is only “general” in a limited sense. Do note, however,
that humans display extreme generalization both in terms of system-centric gener-
alization (quick adaptability to highly novel situations from little experience) and
developer-aware generalization (ability of contemporary humans to handle situations
that previous humans have never experienced during their evolutionary history).
To this list, we could, theoretically, add one more entry: “universality” , which would
extend “generality” beyond the scope of task domains relevant to humans, to any task that
could be practically tackled within our universe (note that this is different from “any task at
all” as understood in the assumptions of the No Free Lunch theorem [98, 97]). We discuss
in II.1.2 why we do not consider universality to be a reasonable goal for AI.
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
Crucially, the history of AI has been one of slowly climbing up this spectrum, start-
ing with systems that largely did not display generalization (symbolic AI), and evolving
towards robust systems (machine learning) capable of local generalization. We are now
entering a new stage, where we seek to create ﬂexible systems capable of broad generaliza-
tion (e.g. hybrid symbolic and machine learning systems such as self-driving vehicles, AI
assistants, or cognitive developmental robots). Skill-focused task-speciﬁc evaluation has
been appropriate for close-ended systems that aim at robustness in environments that only
feature known unknowns, but developing systems that are capable of handling unknown
unknowns requires evaluating their abilities in a general sense.
Importantly, the spectrum of generalization outlined above seems to mirror the organi-
zation of humans cognitive abilities as laid out by theories of the structure of intelligence
in cognitive psychology. Major theories of the structure of human intelligence (CHC [62],
g-VPR [48]) all organize cognitive abilities in a hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), with three
strata (in CHC): general intelligence (g factor) at the top, broad abilities in the middle, and
specialized skills or test tasks at the bottom (this extends to 4 strata for g-VPR, which splits
broad abilities into two layers), albeit the taxonomy of abilities differs between theories.
Here, “extreme generalization” corresponds to the g factor, “broad generalization” across a
given domain corresponds to a broad cognitive ability, and “local generalization” (as well
as the no-generalization case) corresponds to task-speciﬁc skill.
Measuring such broad abilities (and possibly generality itself) rather than speciﬁc skills
has historically been the problematic of the ﬁeld of psychometrics. Could psychometrics
inform the evaluation of abilities in AI systems?
Figure 1: Hierarchical model of cognitive abilities and its mapping to the spectrum of general-
ization.
Note that, in what follows:
• We use “broad abilities” to refer to cognitive abilities that lead to broad or extreme
generalization. Developing such abilities should be the goal of any researcher inter-
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
ested in ﬂexible AI or general AI. “Broad abilities” is often meant in opposition to
“local generalization”.
• We use “generalization” to refer to the entire spectrum of generalization, starting with
local generalization.
• Because human general intelligence (the g factor) is itself a very broad cognitive
ability (the top of the hierarchy of abilities), we use the term “intelligence” or “general
intelligence” to refer to extreme generalization as deﬁned above.
I.3.3 Measuring broad abilities and general intelligence: the psychometrics
perspective
It seems to us that in intelligence there is a
fundamental faculty, the alteration or the lack
of which, is of the utmost importance for
practical life. This faculty is [...] the faculty of
adapting one’s self to circumstances.
Alfred Binet, 1916
In the early days of the 20th century, Binet and Simon, looking for a formal way to
distinguish children with mental disabilities from those with behavior problems, developed
the Binet-Simon scale [8], the ﬁrst test of intelligence, founding the ﬁeld of psychometrics.
Immediately after, Spearman observed that individual results across different, seemingly
unrelated types of intelligence tests were correlated, and hypothesized the existence of a
single factor of general intelligence, the g factor [83, 84]. Today, psychometrics is a well-
established subﬁeld of psychology that has arrived at some of the most reproducible results
of the ﬁeld. Modern intelligence tests are developed by following strict standards regarding
reliability (low measurement error, a notion tied to reproducibility), validity (measuring
what one purports to be measuring, a notion tied to statistical consistency and predictive-
ness), standardization, and freedom from bias – see e.g. Classical Test Theory (CTT) [20]
and Item Response Theory (IRT) [34].
A fundamental notion in psychometrics is that intelligence tests evaluate broad cog-
nitive abilities as opposed to task-speciﬁc skills. Theories of the structure of intelligence
(such as CHC, g-VPR), which have co-evolved with psychometric testing (statistical phe-
nomena emerging from test results have informed these theories, and these theories have
informed test design) organize these abilities in a hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), rather sim-
ilarly to the spectrum of generalization we presented earlier. Importantly, an ability is an
abstract construct (based on theory and statistical phenomena) as opposed to a directly mea-
surable, objective property of an individual mind, such as a score on a speciﬁc test. Broad
abilities in AI, which are also constructs, fall into the exact same evaluation problematics
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
as cognitive abilities from psychometrics. Psychometrics approaches the quantiﬁcation of
abilities by using broad batteries of test tasks rather than any single task, and by analysing
test results via probabilistic models. Importantly, the tasks should be previously unknown
to the test-taker, i.e., we assume that test-takers do not practice for intelligence tests. This
approach is highly relevant to AI evaluation.
Remarkably, in a parallel to psychometrics, there has been recent and increasing inter-
est across the ﬁeld of AI in using broad batteries of test tasks to evaluate systems that aim
at greater ﬂexibility. Examples include the Arcade Learning Environment for Reinforce-
ment Learning agents [6], Project Malm ¨O [71], the Behavior Suite [68], or the GLUE [95]
and SuperGLUE [94] benchmarks for natural language processing. The underlying logic
of these efforts is to measure something more general than skill at one speciﬁc task by
broadening the set of target tasks. However, when it comes to assessing ﬂexibility, a crit-
ical defect of these multi-task benchmarks is that the set of tasks is still known in advance
to the developers of any test-taking system, and it is fully expected that test-taking systems
will be able to practice speciﬁcally for the target tasks, leverage task-speciﬁc built-in prior
knowledge inherited from the system developers, leverage external knowledge obtained via
pre-training, etc. As such, these benchmarks still appear to be highly gameable (see e.g.
II.1.1) – merely widening task-speciﬁc skill evaluation to more tasks does not produce a
qualitatively different kind of evaluation. Such benchmarks are still looking at skills, rather
than abilities, in contrast with the psychometrics approach (this is not to say that such
benchmarks are not useful; merely that such static multi-task benchmarks do not directly
assess ﬂexibility or generality).
In addition to these multi-task benchmarks, a number of more ambitious test suites
for cognitive abilities of AI have been proposed in the past but have not been imple-
mented in practice: the Newell test by Anderson and Lebiere ([2], named in reference to
[66]), the BICA “cognitive decathlon” targeted at developmental robotics [65], the Turing
Olympics [27], and the I-Athlon [1]. Lacking concrete implementations, it is difﬁcult to
assess whether these projects would have been able to address the ability evaluation prob-
lem they set out to solve. On the other hand, two similarly-spirited but more mature test
suite have emerged recently, focused on generalization capabilities as opposed to speciﬁc
tasks: the Animal-AI Olympics [7] (animalaiolympics.com) and the GVGAI competition
[72] (gvgai.net). Both take the position that AI agents should be evaluated on an unseen set
of tasks or games, in order to test learning or planning abilities rather than special-purpose
skill. Both feature a multi-game environment and an ongoing public competition.
I.3.4 Integrating AI evaluation and psychometrics
Besides efforts to broaden task-speciﬁc evaluation to batteries of multi-task tests, there
have been more direct and explicit attempts to integrate AI evaluation and psychometrics.
A ﬁrst approach is to reuse existing psychometric intelligence tests, initially developed for
humans, as a way to assess intelligence in AI systems – perhaps an obvious idea if we are to
take the term “artiﬁcial intelligence” literally. This idea was ﬁrst proposed by Green in 1964
[29], and was, around the same time, explored by Evans [24], who wrote a LISP program
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
called ANALOGY capable of solving a geometric analogy task of the kind that may be
found in a pyschometric intelligence test. Newell suggested the idea again in 1973 [66] in
his seminal paper You can’t play 20 questions with Nature and win. It was proposed again
and reﬁned by Bringsjord et al. in the 2000s under the name “Psychometric AI” (PAI) [9].
However, it has since become apparent that it is possible for AI system developers to game
human intelligence tests, because the tasks used in these tests are available to the system
developers, and thus the developers can straightforwardly solve the abstract form of these
problems themselves and hard-code the solution in program form (see, for instance, [23, 80,
44]), much like Evans did with in the 1960s with the ANALOGY program. Effectively, in
this case, it is the system developers who are solving the test problems, rather than any AI.
The implicit assumptions that psychometric test designers make about human test-takers
turn out to be difﬁcult to enforce in the case of machines.
An alternative, more promising approach is to leverage what psychometrics can teach
us about ability assessment and test design to create new types of benchmarks targeted
speciﬁcally at evaluating broad abilities in AI systems. Along these lines, Hern ´andez-
Orallo et al. have proposed extending psychometric evaluation to any intelligent system,
including AI agents and animals, in “Universal Psychometrics” [39].
We argue that several important principles of psychometrics can inform intelligence
evaluation in AI in the context of the development of broad AI and general AI:
• Measuring abilities (representative of broad generalization and skill-acquisition efﬁ-
ciency), not skills. Abilities are distinct from skills in that they induce broad general-
ization, i.e. they form the basis for skill across a broad range of tasks, including tasks
that were previously unknown to the ability-enabled system and its developers.
• Doing so via batteries of tasks rather than any single task, that should be previously
unknown to both the test taking system and the system developers (this is necessary
to assess broad generalization as opposed to skill or local generalization).
• Having explicit standards regarding reliability, validity, standardization, and freedom
from bias:
– Reliability implies that the test results for a given system should be reproducible
over time and across research groups.
– Validity implies that what the test assesses should be clearly understood; test
creators should be able to answer 1) what assumptions does the test make? 2)
what does the test predict, i.e. what broad abilities would a successful result
demonstrate, and how well does the test predict these abilities? (Which should
ideally be achieved via statistical quantiﬁcation.)
– Standardization implies adopting shared benchmarks across the subset of the
research community that pursues broad AI and general AI. Standard benchmarks
in computer vision and natural language processing have already shown to be
highly effective catalyzers of progress.
– Freedom from bias implies that the test should not be biased against groups of
test-takers in ways that run orthogonal to the abilities being assessed. For in-
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
stance, a test of intelligence designed for both humans and AI should not lever-
age uniquely human acquired knowledge, or should not involve constraints un-
related to intelligence within which machines have unfair advantages (such as
fast reaction times), etc.
Simultaneously, we argue that certain other aspects of psychometrics may be discarded
in the development of new intelligence tests for AI:
• The exact number and taxonomy of cognitive abilities considered, being a subject of
ongoing debate within cognitive psychology and being perhaps overly anthropocen-
tric, should not be used as a strict template for artiﬁcial cognitive architectures and
their evaluation. Existing taxonomies may at best serve as a source of inspiration.
• A number of abilities being assessed by psychometric intelligence tests are crystal-
lized abilities (e.g. reading and writing), i.e. abilities that are acquired through expe-
rience, which are not clearly distinguishable from skills (they are effectively multi-
purpose skills). We argue that AI tests that seek to assess ﬂexibility and generality
should not consider crystallized abilities, but rather, should focus on abilities that
enable new skill acquisition. If a system possesses abilities that enable efﬁcient skill-
acquisition in a domain, the system should have no issue in developing corresponding
skills and crystallized abilities.
I.3.5 Current trends in broad AI evaluation
Despite a rising interest in building ﬂexible systems, or even in generality itself, for the
most part the AI community has not been paying much attention to psychometric evalua-
tion, Psychometric AI, or Universal Psychometrics. If we are to assess the contemporary
zeitgeist of broad AI evaluation, here is what we see. 4
First, we note several positive developments. Since 2017, there is increasing awareness
that one should seek to establish some form of generalization in evaluating Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms (e.g. [50, 70, 17, 49]), which was previously a stark problem
[76, 35, 101, 70], as RL agents have for a long time been tested on their training data.
Further, there is increasing interest in evaluating the data-efﬁciency of learning algorithms
(e.g. [10]), in particular in the context of RL for games such as Atari games or Minecraft
(e.g. [71, 33]). Lastly, as noted in I.3.3, there has been a trend towards leveraging multi-task
benchmarks as a way to assess robustness and ﬂexibility (e.g. [6, 71, 68, 95, 94]).
Unfortunately, we must also note several negatives. The robustness of the systems
being developed, in particular Deep Learning models, is often problematic (see e.g. [16,
59]). This is due in large part to the fact that most benchmarks do not pay much attention
to formally assessing robustness and quantifying generalization, and thus can be solved
via “shortcuts” that gradient descent is apt at exploiting (e.g. surface statistics such as
textures in the case of computer vision [46]). Likewise, the reproducibility (reliability) of
4Because broad AI research is currently largely dominated by Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches, many
of our observations here are speciﬁc to RL.
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
research ﬁndings is often an issue [73], especially in Reinforcement Learning, although
some progress has been made on this front.
Most importantly, the evaluation of any ability that goes decisively beyond local gen-
eralization is still largely a green ﬁeld, and little effort has been devoted to investigate it.
Hern´andez-Orallo noted in 2017 that “ability-oriented and general-purpose evaluation ap-
proaches [...] are still very incipient, and more research and discussion is needed” [36].
Recent attempts at broadening task-speciﬁc benchmarks by including multiple tasks do not
measure developer-aware generalization, as the tasks are all known in advance to system
developers (as noted in I.3.3). Attempts at assessing generalization by testing RL systems
on previously unseen game levels, like CoinRun [17] or Obstacle Tower [49], are still only
looking at task-speciﬁc local generalization, by evaluating a candidate system on new sam-
ples from a known distribution rather than using a substantially new task (as suggested in
III.3). In addition, the fact the level-generation programs used are available to the AI devel-
opers means it is possible to “cheat” on these benchmarks by sampling arbitrary amounts
of training data (cf. II.1.1).
Further, contemporary research “moonshots” that are publicly advertised as being steps
towards general intelligence appear to still be focusing on skill-based task-speciﬁc evalua-
tion for board games and video games (e.g. Go [82, 81] and StarCraft [93] for DeepMind,
DotA2 [89] for OpenAI) via highly-mediatized confrontations with top human players.
Despite claims of progress towards general AI in associated public communications5, such
evaluation does not involve any measure of generalization power, and has little-to-no over-
lap with the development of ﬂexibility and generality, as we outline in II.1. For example,
although OpenAI’s DotA2-playing AI “Five” was trained on 45,000 years of play and was
able to beat top human players [89], it has proven very brittle, as non-champion human
players were able to ﬁnd strategies to reliably beat it in a matter of days after the AI was
made available for the public to play against [90]. In addition, Five did not even generalize
to DotA2 in the ﬁrst place: it could only play a restricted version of the game, with 16
characters instead of over 100. Likewise, AlphaGo and its successor AlphaZero, developed
in 2016 and 2017, have not yet found any application outside of board games, to the best of
our knowledge.
We deplore this discrepancy between a focus on surpassing humans at tests of skill on
one hand (while entirely disregarding whether the methods through which skill is achieved
are generalizable), and a manifest interest in developing broad abilities on the other hand –
an endeavour entirely orthogonal to skill itself. We hypothesize that this discrepancy is due
to a lack of a clear conceptualization of intelligence, skill, and generalization, as well as a
lack of appropriate measures and benchmarks for broad cognitive abilities. In what follows,
we expose in more detail the issue with using task-speciﬁc “moonshots” (e.g. achieving
better-than-human performance in a video game or board game) as stepping stones towards
more general forms of AI, and we propose a formal deﬁnition of intelligence meant to be
actionable in the pursuit of ﬂexible AI and general AI.
5OpenAI public statement: “Five is a step towards advanced AI systems which can handle the complexity and
uncertainty of the real world”
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
II A new perspective
II.1 Critical assessment
II.1.1 Measuring the right thing: evaluating skill alone does not move us
forward
In 1973, psychologist and computer science pioneer Allen Newell, worried that recent ad-
vances in cognitive psychology were not bringing the ﬁeld any closer to a holistic theory
of cognition, published his seminal paper You can’t play 20 questions with nature and win
[66], which helped focus research efforts on cognitive architecture modelling, and provided
new impetus to the longstanding quest to build a chess-playing AI that would outperform
any human. Twenty-four years later, In 1997, IBM’s DeepBlue beat Gary Kasparov, the
best chess player in the world, bringing this quest to an end [12]. When the dust settled,
researchers were left with the realization that building an artiﬁcial chess champion had not
actually taught them much, if anything, about human cognition. They had learned how
to build a chess-playing AI, and neither this knowledge nor the AI they had built could
generalize to anything other than similar board games.
It may be obvious from a modern perspective that a static chess-playing program based
on minimax and tree search would not be informative about human intelligence, nor com-
petitive with humans in anything other than chess. But it was not obvious in the 1970s,
when chess-playing was thought by many to capture, and require, the entire scope of ratio-
nal human thought. Perhaps less obvious in 2019 is that efforts to “solve” complex video
games using modern machine learning methods still follow the same pattern. Newell wrote
[66]: “we know already from existing work [psychological studies on humans] that the
task [chess] involves forms of reasoning and search and complex perceptual and memorial
processes. For more general considerations we know that it also involves planning, eval-
uation, means-ends analysis and redeﬁnition of the situation, as well as several varieties
of learning – short-term, post-hoc analysis, preparatory analysis, study from books, etc. ”.
The assumption was that solving chess would require implementing these general abilities.
Chess does indeed involve these abilities – in humans. But while possessing these general
abilities makes it possible to solve chess (and many more problems), by going from the
general to the speciﬁc, inversely, there is no clear path from the speciﬁc to the general.
Chess does not require any of these abilities, and can be solved by taking radical shortcuts
that run orthogonal to human cognition.
Optimizing for single-purpose performance is useful and valid if one’s measure of suc-
cess can capture exactly what one seeks (as we outlined in I.3.1), e.g. if one’s end goal is
a chess-playing machine and nothing more. But from the moment the objective is settled,
the process of developing a solution will be prone to taking all shortcuts available to satisfy
the objective of choice – whether this process is gradient descent or human-driven research.
These shortcuts often come with undesirable side-effects when it comes to considerations
not incorporated the measure of performance. If the environment in which the system is
to operate is too unpredictable for an all-encompassing objective function to be deﬁned
beforehand (e.g. most real-world applications of robotics, where systems face unknown
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
unknowns), or if one aims at a general-purpose AI that could be applied to a wide range
of problems with no or little human engineering, then one must somehow optimize directly
for ﬂexibility and generality, rather than solely for performance on any speciﬁc task.
This is, perhaps, a widely-accepted view today when it comes to static programs that
hard-code a human-designed solution. When a human engineer implements a chatbot by
specifying answers for each possible query via if/else statements, we do not assume this
chatbot to be intelligent, and we do not expect it to generalize beyond the engineer’s speci-
ﬁcations. Likewise, if an engineer looks at a speciﬁc IQ test task, comes up with a solution,
and write down this solution in program form, we do not expect the program to general-
ize to new tasks, and we do not believe that the program displays intelligence – the only
intelligence at work here is the engineer’s. The program merely encodes the crystallized
output of the engineer’s thought process – it is this process, not its output, that implements
intelligence. Intelligence is not demonstrated by the performance of the output program
(a skill), but by the fact that the same process can be applied to a vast range of previously
unknown problems (a general-purpose ability): the engineer’s mind is capable of extreme
generalization. Since the resulting program is merely encoding the output of that process,
it is no more intelligent than the ink and paper used to write down the proof of a theorem.
However, what of a program that is not hard-coded by humans, but trained from data
to perform a task? A learning machine certainly may be intelligent: learning is a neces-
sary condition to adapt to new information and acquire new skills. But being programmed
through exposure to data is no guarantee of generalization or intelligence. Hard-coding
prior knowledge into an AI is not the only way to artiﬁcially “buy” performance on the
target task without inducing any generalization power. There is another way: adding more
training data, which can augment skill in a speciﬁc vertical or task without affecting gener-
alization whatsoever.
Information processing systems form a spectrum between two extremes: on one end,
static systems that consist entirely of hard-coded priors (such as DeepBlue or our if/else
chatbot example), and on the opposite end, systems that incorporate very few priors and
are almost entirely programmed via exposure to data (such as a hashtable or a densely-
connected neural network). Most intelligent systems, including humans and animals, com-
bine ample amounts of both priors and experience, as we point out in II.1.3. Crucially, the
ability to generalize is an axis that runs orthogonal to the prior/experience plane. Given a
learning system capable of achieving a certain level of generalization, modifying the sys-
tem by incorporating more priors or more training data about the task can lead to greater
task-speciﬁc performance without affecting generalization. In this case, both priors and
experience serve as a way to “game” any given test of skill without having to display the
sort of general-purpose abilities that humans would rely on to acquire the same skill.
This can be readily demonstrated with a simple example: consider a hashtable that uses
a locality-sensitive hash function (e.g. nearest neighbor) to map new inputs to previously
seen inputs. Such a system implements a learning algorithm capable of local generalization,
the extent of which is ﬁxed (independent of the amount of data seen), determined only
by the abstraction capabilities of the hash function. This system, despite only featuring
trace amounts of generalization power, is already sufﬁcient to “solve” any task for which
19


===== PAGE 20 =====
unlimited training data can be generated, such as any video game. All that one has to do is
obtain a dense sampling of the space of situations that needs to be covered, and associate
each situation with an appropriate action vector.
Adding ever more data to a local-generalization learning system is certainly a fair strat-
egy if one’s end goal is skill on the task considered, but it will not lead to generalization
beyond the data the system has seen (the resulting system is still very brittle, e.g. Deep
Learning models such as OpenAI Five), and crucially, developing such systems does not
teach us anything about achieving ﬂexibility and generality. “Solving” any given task with
beyond-human level performance by leveraging either unlimited priors or unlimited data
does not bring us any closer to broad AI or general AI, whether the task is chess, football,
or any e-sport.
Current evidence (e.g. [51, 46, 16, 59, 50]) points to the fact that contemporary Deep
Learning models are local-generalization systems, conceptually similar to a locality-sensitive
hashtable – they may be trained to achieve arbitrary levels of skill at any task, but do-
ing so requires a dense sampling of the input-cross-target space considered (as outlined in
[16]), which is impractical to obtain for high-value real-world applications, such as L5 self-
driving (e.g. [5] notes that 30 million training situations is not enough for a Deep Learning
model to learn to drive a car in a plain supervised setting). Hypothetically, it may be shown
in the future that methods derived from Deep Learning could be capable of stronger forms
of generalization, but demonstrating this cannot be done merely by achieving high skill,
such as beating humans at DotA2 or Starcraft given unlimited data or unlimited engineer-
ing; instead, one should seek to precisely establish and quantify thegeneralization strength
of such systems (e.g. by considering prior-efﬁciency and data-efﬁciency in skill acquisition,
as well as the developer-aware generalization difﬁculty of the tasks considered). A central
point of this document is to provide a formal framework for doing so (II.2 and II.3). Failing
to account for priors, experience, and generalization difﬁculty in our evaluation methods
will prevent our ﬁeld from climbing higher along the spectrum of generalization (I.3.2) and
from eventually reaching general AI.
In summary, the hallmark of broad abilities (including general intelligence, as per II.1.2)
is the power to adapt to change, acquire skills, and solve previously unseen problems – not
skill itself, which is merely the crystallized output of the process of intelligence. Testing
for skill at a task that is known in advance to system developers (as is the current trend
in general AI research) can be gamed without displaying intelligence, in two ways: 1)
unlimited prior knowledge, 2) unlimited training data. To actually assess broad abilities,
and thus make progress toward ﬂexible AI and eventually general AI, it is imperative that
we control for priors, experience, and generalization difﬁcultyin our evaluation methods,
in a rigorous and quantitative way.
II.1.2 The meaning of generality: grounding the g factor
It is a well-known fact of cognitive psychology that different individuals demonstrate dif-
ferent cognitive abilities to varying degrees, albeit results across all tests of intelligence
20


===== PAGE 21 =====
are correlated. This points to cognition being a multi-dimensional object, structured in a
hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), with a single generality factor at the top, the g factor. But is
“general intelligence” the apex of the cognitive pyramid in an absolute sense (as is some-
times assumed by proponents of “Artiﬁcial General Intelligence”), or is it merely a broader
cognitive ability, one that would remain fairly specialized, and wouldn’t be qualitatively
distinct from other abilities lower down the hierarchy? How general is human intelligence?
The No Free Lunch theorem [98, 97] teaches us that any two optimization algorithms
(including human intelligence) are equivalent when their performance is averaged across
every possible problem, i.e. algorithms should be tailored to their target problem in order to
achieve better-than-random performance. However, what is meant in this context by “every
possible problem” refers to a uniform distribution over problem space; the distribution of
tasks that would be practically relevant to our universe (which, due to its choice of laws of
physics, is a specialized environment) would not ﬁt this deﬁnition. Thus we may ask: is the
human g factor universal? Would it generalize to every possible task in the universe?
This is a question that is largely irrelevant for psychometrics, because as a subﬁeld of
psychology, it makes the implicit assumption that it is concerned solely with humans and
the human experience. But this question is highly relevant when it comes to AI: if there
is such a thing as universal intelligence, and if human intelligence is an implementation
of it, then this algorithm of universal intelligence should be the end goal of our ﬁeld, and
reverse-engineering the human brain could be the shortest path to reach it. It would make
our ﬁeld close-ended: a riddle to be solved. If, on the other hand, human intelligence is
a broad but ad-hoc cognitive ability that generalizes to human-relevant tasks but not much
else, this implies that AI is an open-ended, fundamentally anthropocentric pursuit, tied to
a speciﬁc scope of applicability. This has implications for how we should measure it (by
using human intelligence and human tasks as a reference) and for the research strategies we
should follow to achieve it.
The g factor, by deﬁnition, represents the single cognitive ability common to success
across all intelligence tests, emerging from applying factor analysis to test results across a
diversity of tests and individuals. But intelligence tests, by construction, only encompass
tasks that humans can perform – tasks that are immediately recognizable and understand-
able by humans (anthropocentric bias), since including tasks that humans couldn’t perform
would be pointless. Further, psychometrics establishes measurement validity by demon-
strating predictiveness with regard to activities that humans value (e.g. scholastic success):
the very idea of a “valid” measure of intelligence only makes sense within the frame of
reference of human values.
In fact, the interpretation of what speciﬁc abilities make someone “intelligent” vary
from culture to culture [100, 86, 18]. More broadly, humans have historically had a poor
track record when it comes to attributing intelligence to complex information-processing
agents around them, whether looking at humans from other cultures or at animals (such
as octopuses, dolphins, great apes, etc.). We only reluctantly open up to the possibility
that systems different from ourselves may be “intelligent” if they display relatable human-
like behaviors that we associate with intelligence, such as language or tool use; behaviors
that have high intrinsic complexity and high adaptability but that are not directly relatable
21


===== PAGE 22 =====
(such as octopus camouﬂage) are not perceived as intelligent. This observation extends to
collective entities (e.g. markets, companies, Science as an institution) and natural processes
(e.g. biological evolution). Although they can be modeled as standalone systems whose
abilities and behavior match broadly accepted deﬁnitions of intelligence (achieving goals
across a wide range of environments, demonstrating ﬂexibility and adaptability, etc.), we do
not categorize these systems as intelligent, simply because they aren’t sufﬁciently human-
like.
To use a well-known cross-domain analogy [25]: much like “intelligence”, the notion
of “physical ﬁtness” (as it pertains to sports and other physical activities) is an intuitively-
understandable, informal, yet useful concept. Like intelligence, ﬁtness is not easily re-
ducible to any single factor (such as a person’s age or muscle mass), rather, it seems to
emerge from a constellation of interdependent factors. If we sought to rigorously mea-
sure physical ﬁtness in humans, we would come up with a set of diverse tests such as
running a 100m, running a marathon, swimming, doing sit-ups, doing basketball throws,
etc., not unlike IQ test suites. Across tests results, we would observe clusters of correla-
tions, corresponding to broad “physical abilities” strictly analogous to cognitive abilities
(e.g. lung capacity might be such an “ability” inducing correlations across tests). Much
like in the case of cognitive abilities, experts would probably disagree and debate as to the
exact taxonomy of these broad abilities (is being “tall and lean” an ability, or is “tallness” a
standalone factor?). And crucially, we should intuitively expect to ﬁnd thatall tests results
would be correlated: we would observe a physical g factor, corresponding to the general
intuitive construct of “physical ﬁtness”.
But would this mean that human morphology and motor affordances are “general” in
an absolute sense, and that a very ﬁt person could handle any physical task at all? Certainly
not; we are not adapted for the large majority of environments that can be found in the uni-
verse – from the Earth’s oceans to the surface of Venus, from the atmosphere of Jupiter to
interstellar space. It is, however, striking and remarkable that human physical abilities gen-
eralize to a far greater range of environments and tasks than the limited set of environments
and activities that guided their evolution. To caricature, human bodies evolved for running
in the East-African savanna, yet they are capable of climbing mount Everest, swimming
across lakes, skydiving, playing basketball, etc. This is not a coincidence; by necessity,
evolution optimizes for adaptability, whether cognitive adaptability or sensorimotor adapt-
ability. Human physical capabilities can thus be said to be “general”, but only in a limited
sense; when taking a broader view, humans reveal themselves to be extremely specialized,
which is to be expected given the process through which they evolved.
We argue that human cognition follows strictly the same pattern as human physical
capabilities: both emerged as evolutionary solutions to speciﬁc problems in speciﬁc en-
vironments (commonly known as “the four Fs”). Both were, importantly, optimized for
adaptability, and as a result they turn out to be applicable for a surprisingly greater range
of tasks and environments beyond those that guided their evolution (e.g. piano-playing,
solving linear algebra problems, or swimming across the Channel) – a remarkable fact
that should be of the utmost interest to anyone interested in engineering broad or general-
purpose abilities of any kind. Both are multi-dimensional concepts that can be modeled as
22


===== PAGE 23 =====
a hierarchy of broad abilities leading up to a “general” factor at the top. And crucially, both
are still ultimately highly specialized (which should be unsurprising given the context of
their development): much like human bodies are unﬁt for the quasi-totality of the universe
by volume, human intellect is not adapted for the large majority of conceivable tasks.
This includes obvious categories of problems such as those requiring long-term plan-
ning beyond a few years, or requiring large working memory (e.g. multiplying 10-digit
numbers). This also includes problems for which our innate cognitive priors are unadapted;
for instance, humans can be highly efﬁcient in solving certain NP-hard problems of small
size when these problems present cognitive overlap with evolutionarily familiar tasks such
as navigation (e.g. the Euclidean Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) with low point count
can be solved by humans near-optimally in near-linear optimal time [58], using perceptual
strategies), but perform poorly – often no better than random search – for problem instances
of very large size or problems with less cognitive overlap with evolutionarily familiar tasks
(e.g. certain non-Euclidean problems). For instance, in the TSP, human performance de-
grades severely when inverting the goal from “ﬁnding the shortest path” to “ﬁnding the
longest path” [57] – humans perform even worse in this case than one of the simplest pos-
sible heuristic: farthest neighbor construction. 6
A particularly marked human bias is dimensional bias: humans show excellent perfor-
mance on 2D navigation tasks and 2D shape-packing puzzles, and can still handle 3D cases
albeit with greatly reduced performance, but they are effectively unable to handle 4D and
higher. This fact is perhaps unsurprising given human reliance on perceptual strategies for
problem-solving – strategies which are backed by neural mechanisms speciﬁcally evolved
for 2D navigation (hippocampal systems of place cells and grid cells [64]).
Thus, a central point of this document is that “general intelligence” is not a binary
property which a system either possesses or lacks. It is a spectrum, tied to 1) a scope of
application, which may be more or less broad, and 2) the degree of efﬁciency with which the
system translate its priors and experience into new skills over the scope considered, 3) the
degree of generalization difﬁculty represented by different points in the scope considered
(see II.2). In addition, the “value” of one scope of application over another is entirely
subjective; we wouldn’t be interested in (and wouldn’t even perceive as intelligent) a system
whose scope of application had no intersection with our own.
As such, it is conceptually unsound to set “artiﬁcial general intelligence” in an absolute
sense (i.e. “universal intelligence”) as a goal. To set out to build broad abilities of any kind,
one must start from a target scope, and one must seek to achieve a well-deﬁned intelligence
threshold within this scope: AI is a deeply contextual and open-ended endeavour, not a sin-
gle one-time riddle to be solved. However, it may in theory be possible to create human-like
artiﬁcial intelligence: we may gradually build systems that extend across the same scope
of applicability as human intelligence, and we may gradually increase their generalization
power within this scope until it matches that of humans. We may even build systems with
higher generalization power (as there is no a priori reason to assume human cognitive ef-
6This does not necessarily mean that humanity as a collective is incapable of solving these problems; pooling
individual humans over time or augmenting human intellect via external resources leads to increased generality,
albeit this increase remains incremental, and still fundamentally differs from universality.
23


===== PAGE 24 =====
ﬁciency is an upper bound), or systems with a broader scope of application. Such systems
would feature intelligence beyond that of humans.
In conclusion, we propose that research on developing broad in AI systems (up to “gen-
eral” AI, i.e. AI with a degree of generality comparable to human intelligence) should focus
on deﬁning, measuring, and developing a speciﬁcally human-like form of intelligence, and
should benchmark progress speciﬁcally against human intelligence (which is itself highly
specialized). This isn’t because we believe that intelligence that greatly differs from our
own couldn’t exist or wouldn’t have value; rather, we recognize that characterizing and
measuring intelligence is a process that must be tied to a well-deﬁned scope of applica-
tion, and at this time, the space of human-relevant tasks is the only scope that we can
meaningfully approach and assess . We thus disagree with the perspective of Universal
Psychometrics [39] or Legg and Hutter’s Universal Intelligence [54], which reject anthro-
pocentrism altogether and seek to measure all intelligence against a single absolute scale.
An anthropocentric frame of reference is not only legitimate, it is necessary.
II.1.3 Separating the innate from the acquired: insights from developmental
psychology
Advances in developmental psychology teach us that neither of the two opposing views of
the nature of the mind described in I.2 are accurate (see e.g. [85]): the human mind is not
merely a collection of special-purpose programs hard-coded by evolution; it is capable of a
remarkable degree of generality and open-endedness, going far beyond the scope of envi-
ronments and tasks that guided its evolution. The large majority of the skills and knowledge
we possess are acquired during our lifetimes, rather than innate. Simultaneously, the mind
is not a single, general-purpose “blank slate” system capable of learning anything from ex-
perience. Our cognition is specialized, shaped by evolution in speciﬁc ways; we are born
with priors about ourselves, about the world, and about how to learn, which determine what
categories of skills we can acquire and what categories of problems we can solve.
These priors are not a limitation to our generalization capabilities; to the contrary, they
are their source, the reason why humans are capable of acquiring certain categories of skills
with remarkable efﬁciency. The central message of the No Free Lunch theorem [98] is that
to learn from data, one must make assumptions about it – the nature and structure of the
innate assumptions made by the human mind are precisely what confers to it its powerful
learning abilities.
We noted in II.1.1 that an actionable measure of intelligence should, crucially, con-
trol for priors and experience. We proposed in II.1.2 that evaluating general intelligence
should leverage human intelligence as a necessary frame of reference. It follows that we
need a clear understanding of human cognitive priors in order to fairly evaluate general
intelligence between humans and machines.
Human cognitive priors come in multiple forms, in particular 7:
7The boundaries between these categories may be ﬂuid; the distinction between low-level sensorimotor priors
and high-level knowledge priors is more one of degree than one of nature; likewise, the distinction between meta-
24


===== PAGE 25 =====
• Low-level priors about the structure of our own sensorimotor space, e.g. reﬂexes such
as the vestibulo-ocular reﬂex, the palmar grasp reﬂex, etc. These priors enable infants
(including prior to birth) to quickly take control of their senses and bodies, and may
even generate simple behaviors in a limited range of situations.
• Meta-learning priors governing our learning strategies and capabilities for knowledge
acquisition. This may include, for instance, the assumption that information in the
universe follows a modular-hierarchical structure, as well as assumptions regarding
causality and spatio-temporal continuity.
• High-level knowledge priors regarding objects and phenomena in our external envi-
ronment. This may include prior knowledge of visual objectness (what deﬁnes an
object), priors about orientation and navigation in 2D and 3D Euclidean spaces, goal-
directedness (expectation that our environment includes agents that behave according
to goals), innate notions about natural numbers, innate social intuition (e.g. theory of
mind), etc.
When it comes to creating artiﬁcial human-like intelligence, low-level sensorimotor pri-
ors are too speciﬁc to be of interest (unless one seeks to build an artiﬁcial human body).
While human meta-learning priors should be of the utmost interest (understanding the
strategies that the brain follows to turn experience into knowledge and skills is effectively
our end goal), these priors are not relevant to evaluating intelligence: they are intelligence,
rather than a third-party modulating factor to be controlled for. They are part of the black
box that we seek to characterize.
It is knowledge priors that should be accounted for when measuring a human-like form
of intelligence. A system that does not possess human innate knowledge priors would be at
a critical disadvantage compared to humans when it comes to efﬁciently turning a given ex-
perience curriculum into skill at a given human task. Inversely, a system that has access to
more extensive hard-coded knowledge about the task at hand could not be fairly compared
to human intelligence – as we noted in II.1.1, unlimited priors allow system developers to
“buy” unbounded performance on any given task, with no implications with regard to gen-
eralization abilities (what we are actually trying to achieve).
Therefore, we propose that an actionable test of human-like general intelligence should
be founded on innate human knowledge priors:
• The priors should be made as close as possible to innate human knowledge priors
as we understand them. As our understanding of human knowledge priors improves
over time, so should the test evolve.
• The test should assume that the system being measured possesses a speciﬁc set of
priors. AI systems with more extensive priors should not be benchmarked using such
a test. AI systems with fewer priors should be understood to be at a disadvantage.
learning priors and knowledge priors is subjective since knowledge facilitates skill acquisition: for instance, the
neural mechanism behind our capabilities to perform 2D navigation may be treated either as a specialized meta-
learning prior or as a knowledge prior about the external world.
25


===== PAGE 26 =====
• The priors assumed by the test should be explicitly and exhaustively described. Im-
portantly, current psychometric intelligence tests make many assumptions about prior
knowledge held by the test-taker (either innate or acquired), but never explicitly de-
scribe these assumptions.
• To make sure that humans test-takers do not bring further priors to the test, the test
tasks should not rely on any acquired human knowledge (i.e. any knowledge beyond
innate prior knowledge). For instance, they should not rely on language or learned
symbols (e.g. arrows), on acquired concepts such as “cat” or “dog”, or on tasks for
which humans may have trained before (e.g. chess).
This leads us to a central question: what is the exact list of knowledge priors that
humans are born with? This is the question that the developmental science theory of Core
Knowledge [85] seeks to answer. Core Knowledge identiﬁes four broad categories of innate
assumptions that form the foundations of human cognition, and which are largely shared
by our non-human relatives 8:
• Objectness and elementary physics: humans assume that their environment should
be parsed into “objects” characterized by principles of cohesion (objects move as
continuous, connected, bounded wholes), persistence (objects do not suddenly cease
to exist and do not suddenly materialize), and contact (objects do not act at a distance
and cannot interpenetrate).
• Agentness and goal-directedness: humans assume that, while some objects in their
environment are inanimate, some other objects are “agents”, possessing intentions of
their own, acting so as to achieve goals (e.g. if we witness an object A following
another moving object B, we may infer that A is pursuing B and that B is ﬂeeing
A), and showing efﬁciency in their goal-directed actions. We expect that these agents
may act contingently and reciprocally.
• Natural numbers and elementary arithmetic: humans possess innate, abstract number
representations for small numbers, which can be applied to entities observed through
any sensory modality. These number representations may be added or subtracted, and
may be compared to each other, or sorted.
• Elementary geometry and topology: this core knowledge system captures notions
of distance, orientation, in/out relationships for objects in our environment and for
ourselves. It underlies humans’ innate facility for orienting themselves with respect
to their surroundings and navigating 2D and 3D environments.
8Core Knowledge has been written into our DNA by natural evolution. Natural evolution is an extremely
low-bandwidth, highly selective mechanism for transferring information from the surrounding environment to an
organism’s genetic code. It can only transfer information associated with evolutionary pressures, and it can only
write about aspects of the environment that are stable over sufﬁciently long timescales. As such, it would not
be reasonable to expect humans to possess vast amounts of human-speciﬁc prior knowledge; core knowledge is
evolutionarily ancient and largely shared across many species, in particular non-human primates.
26


===== PAGE 27 =====
While cognitive developmental psychology has not yet determined with a high degree of
certainty the exact set of innate priors that humans possess, we consider the Core Knowl-
edge theory to offer a credible foundation suitable to the needs of a test of human-like
general intelligence. We therefore propose that an actionable test of general intelligence
that would be fair for both humans and machines should only feature tasks that assume the
four core knowledge systems listed above, and should not involve any acquired knowledge
outside of these priors. We also argue, in agreement with [51], that general AI systems
should hard-code as fundamental priors these core knowledge principles.
II.2 Deﬁning intelligence: a formal synthesis
II.2.1 Intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency
So far, we have introduced the following informally-described intuitions:
• Intelligence lies in broad or general-purpose abilities; it is marked by ﬂexibility and
adaptability (i.e. skill-acquisition and generalization), rather than skill itself. The
history of AI has been a slow climb along the spectrum of generalization.
• A measure of intelligence should imperatively control for experience and priors, and
should seek to quantify generalization strength, since unlimited priors or experience
can produce systems with little-to-no generalization power (or intelligence) that ex-
hibit high skill at any number of tasks.
• Intelligence and its measure are inherently tied to a scope of application. As such,
general AI should be benchmarked against human intelligence and should be founded
on a similar set of knowledge priors.
Let us now formalize these intuitions. In what follows, we provide a series of deﬁnitions
for key concepts necessary to ground a formal deﬁnition of intelligence and its measure.
We will leverage the tools of Algorithmic Information Theory. These deﬁnitions lead up to
a formal way of expressing the following central idea:
The intelligence of a system is a measure of its skill-acquisition efﬁciency over a scope
of tasks, with respect to priors, experience, and generalization difﬁculty.
Intuitively, if you consider two systems that start from a similar set of knowledge priors,
and that go through a similar amount of experience (e.g. practice time) with respect to a
set of tasks not known in advance, the system with higher intelligence is the one that ends
up with greater skills (i.e. the one that has turned its priors and experience into skill more
efﬁciently). This deﬁnition of intelligence encompasses meta-learning priors, memory, and
ﬂuid intelligence. It is distinct from skill itself: skill is merely the output of the process of
intelligence.
Before we start, let us emphasize that many possible deﬁnitions of intelligence may
be valid, across many different contexts, and we do not purport that the deﬁnition above
and the formalism below represent the “one true” deﬁnition. Nor is our deﬁnition meant
27


===== PAGE 28 =====
to achieve broad consensus. Rather, the purpose of our deﬁnition is to be actionable, to
serve as a useful perspective shift for research on broad cognitive abilities, and to function
as a quantitative foundation for new general intelligence benchmarks, such as the one we
propose in part III. As per George Box’s aphorism, “all models are wrong, but some are
useful”: our only aim here is to provide a useful North Star towards ﬂexible and general
AI. We discuss in II.2.3 the concrete ways in which our formalism is useful and actionable.
Position of the problem
First, we must introduce basic deﬁnitions to establish our problem setup. It should be
immediately clear to the reader that our choice of problem setup is sufﬁcient to model
Fully-Supervised Learning, Partially-Supervised Learning, and Reinforcement Learning.
We consider the interaction between a “task” and an “intelligent system”. This interac-
tion is mediated by a “skill program” (generated by the intelligent system) and a “scoring
function” (part of the task).
We implicitly consider the existence of a ﬁxed universal Turing machine on which
our programs run (including the skill programs, as well as programs part of the task and
part of the intelligent system). We also assume the existence of a ﬁxed “situation space”
SituationSpace and “response space” ResponseSpace. Each of these spaces deﬁnes the
set of binary strings that are allowed as input (and output, respectively) of all skill pro-
grams we will consider henceforth. They may be, for instance, the sensor space and the
motor space of an animal or robot.
Figure 2: Position of the problem: an intelligent system generates a skill program to interact
with a task.
A taskT consists of four objects:
• A task stateTaskState (binary string).
• A “situation generation” function SituationGen : TaskState → Situation. It
may be stochastic.
– ASituation is a binary string belonging toSituationSpace.
28


===== PAGE 29 =====
• A “scoring function”Scoring : [Situation,Response,TaskState ] → [Score,Feedback ].
It may be stochastic.
– AResponse is a binary string belonging toResponseSpace.
– A “score” Score is a scalar. It is meant to measure the appropriateness of a
response to a situation.
– A piece of “feedback” Feedback is a binary string. It may encode full or par-
tial information about the current score, or about scores corresponding to past
responses (which may be known to the task state).
– Note: The parameter Situation is technically optional since it may be known
to the task state at runtime – we include it here for maximum explicitness.
• A self-update functionTaskUpdate : [Response,TaskState ] →TaskState , which
mutates the task state based on the response to the latest situation. It may be stochas-
tic.
For instance, a game such as chess or WarCraft III (as well as what we call “task” in the
ARC benchmark presented in III) would constitute a task. A given chess board position,
screen frame in WarCraft III, or input grid in ARC, would constitute a situation.
An intelligent systemIS consists of three objects:
• A system stateISState (binary string).
• A “skill program generation function”:
SkillProgramGen :ISState → [SkillProgram,SPState ].
It may be stochastic.
– A skill programSkillProgram : [Situation,SPState ] → [Response,SPState ]
is a function that maps an input situation to a valid response (part ofResponseSpace),
potentially using some working memory (SPState ). It may be stochastic. Be-
cause it possesses a state SPState (a binary string), it may be used to au-
tonomously handle a series of connected situations without further communi-
cation with the intelligent system that generated it.
– A skill program may be, for instance, any game-speciﬁc program capable of
playing new levels in a given video game.
– In what follows, we refer to “skill program” as the combination of theSkillProgram
function and the initial skill program stateSPState (i.e. skill programs are con-
sidered stateful).
– A skill program represents a frozen version of the system’s task-speciﬁc capa-
bilities (including the ability to adapt to novel situations within the task). We
use the concept of skill program as a conceptual device to formalize the level
of task-speciﬁc skill and task-speciﬁc generalization capabilities of an agent at
a given point in time.
29


===== PAGE 30 =====
• A self-update functionISUpdate : [Situation,Response,Feedback,ISState ] →
ISState , which mutates the system’s state based on the latest situation and corre-
sponding feedback. It may be stochastic.
For instance, a neural network generation and training algorithm for games would be an
“intelligent system”, and the inference-mode game-speciﬁc network it would output at the
end of a training run on one game would be a “skill program”. A program synthesis engine
capable of looking at an ARC task and outputting a solution program would be an “intelli-
gent system”, and the resulting solution program capable of handling future input grids for
this task would be a “skill program”.
The interaction between task, intelligent system, and skill programs is structured in two
phases: a training phase and an evaluation phase. The goal of the training phase is for the
IS to generate a high-skill skill program that will generalize to future evaluation situations.
The goal of the evaluation phase is to assess the capability of this skill program to handle
new situations.
The training phase consists of the repetition of the following steps (we note the current step
ast). Before we start, we consider two separate initial task states,trainTaskState t=0 and
testTaskStatee=0.
• We generate a training situation:situationt ←SituationGen(trainTaskState t)
• TheIS generates a new skill program (without knowledge of the current situation):
[skillProgram t,spStatet] ←SkillProgramGen (isStatet)
– Implicitly, we assume that the “goal” of the IS is to generate highly-skilled
programs, i.e. programs that would have performed well on past situations, that
will perform well on the next situation, and that would perform well on any
possible situation for this task (in particular evaluation situations, which may
feature signiﬁcant novelty and uncertainty). We do not attempt to model why
theIS should pursue this goal.
– spStatet represents the working memory of the skill program at time t. Note
that, because the skill program is generated anew with each training step, state-
fulness across situations via SPState is not actually required during training.
However, statefulness is important during evaluation when handling tasks that
require maintaining information across situations. Note that in many games or
real-world tasks, situations are all independent and thus skill programs don’t
require statefulness at all (e.g. ARC, or any fully-observable game, like chess).
• The skill program outputs a response to the situation:
[responset,spStatet+1] ←skillProgram t(Situationt,spStatet)
– skillProgram t is only called once, andspStatet+1 is discarded, since the skill
program is generated anew by the intelligent system at each training step.
– In practice, in partially-observable games where consecutive situations are very
close to each other (e.g. two consecutive screen frames in WarCraft III), one
30


===== PAGE 31 =====
may assume that skillProgram t at t and skillProgram t+1 would not actu-
ally be generated independently from scratch and would stay very close to each
other (i.e. theIS ’s understanding of the task would be evolving continuously in
program space); spStatet+1 as generated by skillProgram t andspStatet+1
as generated by SkillProgramGen att + 1 would likewise stay very close to
each other.
• The task scoring function assigns a score to the response and generates a piece of
feedback: [scoret,feedback t] ←Scoring(Situationt,responset,trainTaskState t)
– Note: The scalar score is meant to encode how appropriate the response is, and
the feedback data is meant to be used by the intelligent system to update its
state. In simple cases (e.g. fully-supervised learning), the feedback data is the
same as the scalar score, meaning that the intelligent agent would have complete
and immediate information about the appropriateness of its response. In other
cases, the feedback data may only contain partial information, no information,
or information that is only relevant to responses generated for prior situations
(delayed feedback).
• TheIS updates its internal state based on the feedback received from the task:
isStatet+1 ←ISUpdate (Situationt,responset,feedback t,isStatet)
• The task updates its internal state based on the response received to the situation:
trainTaskState t+1 ←TaskUpdate (responset,trainTaskState t)
The training phase ends at the discretion of theSituationGen function (e.g.SituationGen
returns a “STOP” situation), at which timeSkillProgramGen would generate its last skill
program, including an initial state (initial working memory) meant to perform well during
evaluation (e.g. blank).
The evaluation phase is superﬁcially similar to the training phase, with the differences that
1) the task starts from testTaskStatee=0 and consists of an independent series of situ-
ations, 2) it only involves a single ﬁxed skill program testSkillProgram starting with
state testSPState e=0. Crucially, it no longer involves the intelligent system. Note that
testTaskStatee=0 could be chosen stochastically. For instance, different randomly cho-
sen initialtestTaskStatee=0 could be different randomly-generated levels of a game.
Like the separation between skill program and intelligent system, the evaluation phase
should be understood as a conceptual device used to quantify the task-speciﬁc skill and
task-speciﬁc generalization capabilities demonstrated by a system at a given point in time.
The evaluation phase should not be seen as being conceptually similar to a child taking a
school test or an IQ test. In real-world evaluation situations, evaluation involves the entire
intelligent system, dynamically adapting its understanding of the task at hand. A real-world
evaluation situation would be represented in our formalism as being part of the training cur-
riculum – a series of training situations with blank feedback.
31


===== PAGE 32 =====
The evaluation phase consists of the repetition of the following steps (the current step is
notede):
• We generate a test situation:situatione ←SituationGen(testTaskStatee)
• The skill program considered produces a response:
[responsee,testSPState e+1] ←testSkillProgram (situatione,testSPState e)
– Note that the update of the skill program state enables the skill program to
maintain a working memory throughout the evaluation phase. This is useful for
partially-observable games. This is irrelevant to many games (including ARC)
and many real-world tasks, where skill programs would be stateless.
• The task scoring function assigns a score to the response (the feedback is discarded):
scoree ←Scoring(Situatione,responsee,testTaskState e)
• The task updates its internal state based on the response received:
testTaskStatee+1 ←TaskUpdate (responsee,testTaskState e)
The evaluation phase also ends at the discretion of theSituationGen function.
Note that for the sake of simpliﬁcation, we consider that the IS ’s state does not transfer
across tasks; theIS would start with a “blank” state at the beginning of the training phase
for each new task (i.e. only possessing built-in priors). However, the setup above and def-
initions below may be readily extended to consider lifelong learning, to bring it closer to
real-world biological intelligent systems, which learn continuously across a multiplicity of
partially overlapping tasks with often no clear boundaries.
Based on the setup described thus far, we can deﬁne the following useful concepts:
• Evaluation result: Sum of the scalar scores obtained by a ﬁxed skill program over
a speciﬁc evaluation phase instance for a task. Since all objects involved (skill pro-
gram, situation generation program, task update program, initial task state) may be
stochastic, this quantity may also be stochastic. Likewise, we deﬁne training-time
performance as the sum of the scalar scores obtained during a given training phase.
Training-time performance is tied to a speciﬁc sequence of training situations.
• Skill: Probabilistic average of evaluation results over all possible evaluation phase
instances, i.e. average of per-evaluation sum of scores obtained after running the
evaluation phase inﬁnitely many times. Skill is a property of a skill program. Note
that other distributional reduction functions could be used, such as median or mini-
mum.
• Optimal skill: Maximum skill theoretically achievable by the best possible skill pro-
gram on the task. It is a property of a task.
• Sufﬁcient skill threshold, noted θT : Subjective threshold of skill associated with a
task, above which a skill program can be said to “solve” the task. It is a property of a
task.
32


===== PAGE 33 =====
• Task and skill value function: We deﬁne a value function over task space (note that
task space may be inﬁnite), associating a scalar value to the combination of a task
and a threshold of skill θ for the task : TaskValue : Task,θ → ωT,θ . Values
are assumed positive or zero, andTaskValue is assumed monotonous as a function
of θ (for a given task, higher skill always has higher value). This value function
captures the relative importance of skill at each task and deﬁnes the subjective frame
of reference of our intelligence deﬁnition (for instance, if we wish to evaluate human-
like intelligence, we would place high value on achieving high skill at human-relevant
tasks and place no value on tasks that are irrelevant to the human experience). The
valueωT,θ of a skill level at a task is chosen so that the quantityωT,θ can be compared
fairly across different tasks (i.e. it should capture the value we place on achieving skill
θ at taskT ). This enables us to homogeneously aggregate skill across different tasks
without worrying about the scale of the their respective scoring functions.
• Task value, noted ωT : This is the value of achieving sufﬁcient skill level at T , i.e.
ωT =ωT,θT .
• Optimal solution: Any skill program that can achieve optimal skill on a task. Like-
wise we deﬁne atraining-time optimal solution as any skill program that can achieve
optimal training-time performance over a speciﬁc sequence of training situations.
• Sufﬁcient solution: Any skill program that can achieve sufﬁcient skillθT on a task.
• Curriculum: Sequence of interactions (situations, responses, and feedback) between
a task and an intelligent system over a training phase. For a given task and intelligent
system, there exists a space of curricula, parameterized by the stochastic components
of the underlying programs. A curriculum emerges from the interaction between the
system and a task: this can model both teaching and active learning.
• Optimal curriculum: curriculum which leads an intelligent system to produce the best
(highest skill) skill program it can generate for this task. It is speciﬁc to a task and an
intelligent system. There may be more than one optimal curriculum.
• Sufﬁcient curriculum: curriculum which leads an intelligent system to a sufﬁcient
solution. It is speciﬁc to a task and an intelligent system. There may be more than
one sufﬁcient curriculum.
• Task-speciﬁc potential, notedθmax
T,IS : Skill of the best possible skill program that can
be generated by a given intelligent system on a task (after an optimal curriculum). It
is a scalar value speciﬁc to a task and an intelligent system.
• Intelligent system scope : Subspace of task space including all tasks for which task
valueωT is non-zero and for which the intelligent system is capable of producing a
sufﬁcient solution after a training phase. This space may be inﬁnite. “To be capable
of producing a sufﬁcient solution” means that there exists a sufﬁcient curriculum for
the intelligent system and task considered. A scope is a property of an intelligent
system.
• Intelligent system potential: Set of task-speciﬁc potential values over all tasks in the
system’s scope. Potential is a property of an intelligent system.
33


===== PAGE 34 =====
We ﬁnd that in most cases it is more useful to consider sufﬁcient skill and sufﬁcient so-
lutions rather than optimal skill and optimal solutions – in application settings, we seek
to achieve sufﬁcient performance using as little resources as possible; it is rarer and less
practical to seek to achieve maximum possible performance using unlimited resources.
Quantifying generalization difﬁculty, experience, and priors using Algorith-
mic Information Theory
Algorithmic Information Theory (AIT) may be seen as a computer science extension of In-
formation Theory. AIT concerns itself with formalizing useful computer science intuitions
regarding complexity, randomness, information, and computation. Central to AIT is the
notion of Algorithmic Complexity. Algorithmic Complexity (also known as Kolmogorov
Complexity or Algorithmic Entropy) was independently investigated, in different contexts,
by R.J. Solomonoff, A.N. Kolmogorov and G.J. Chaitin in the 1960s. For an extensive
introduction, see [15, 14, 30, 55].
Much like the concept of Entropy in Information Theory, Algorithmic Complexity is a
measure of the “information content” of mathematical objects. For our own needs, we will
only consider the speciﬁc case of binary strings. Indeed, all objects we have introduced
so far have been either scalar values (score, potential), or binary strings (states, programs,
situations, and responses), since any program may be represented as a binary string.
The Algorithmic Complexity (noted H(s)) of a string s is the length of the shortest
description of the string in a ﬁxed universal language, i.e. the length of the shortest pro-
gram that outputs the string when running on a ﬁxed universal Turing machine. Since
any universal Turing machine can emulate any other universal Turing machine, H(s) is
machine-independent to a constant.
We can use Algorithmic Complexity to deﬁne the information content that a string s2
possesses about a strings1 (called “Relative Algorithmic Complexity” and notedH(s1|s2)),
as the length of the shortest program that, taking s2 as input, produces s1. “To take s2 as
input” means that s2 is part of the description of the program, but the length of s2 would
not be taken into account when counting the program’s length.
Because any program may be represented as a binary string, we can use Relative Al-
gorithmic Complexity to describe how closely related two programs are. Based on this
observation, we propose to deﬁne the intuitive notion of “Generalization Difﬁculty” of a
task as follows:
Consider:
• A taskT ,
• Solθ
T , the shortest of all possible solutions ofT of thresholdθ (shortest skill program
that achieves at least skillθ during evaluation),
• TrainSolopt
T,C , the shortest optimal training-time solution given a curriculum (shortest
skill program that achieves optimal training-time performance over the situations in
the curriculum).
34


===== PAGE 35 =====
We then deﬁne Generalization Difﬁculty as:
Generalization Difﬁculty of a task given a curriculumC and a skill thresholdθ, noted
GDθ
T,C : Fraction of the Algorithmic Complexity of solution Solθ
T that is explained by the
shortest optimal training-time solution TrainSolopt
T,C (i.e. length of the shortest program
that, taking as input the shortest possible program that performs optimally over the situa-
tions in curriculumC, produces a program that performs at a skill level of at leastθ during
evaluation, normalized by the length of that skill program). Note that this quantity is be-
tween 0 and 1 by construction.
GDθ
T,C =
H(Solθ
T|TrainSolopt
T,C )
H(Solθ
T )
Thus, a task with high “generalization difﬁculty” is one where the evaluation-time behav-
ior needs to differ signiﬁcantly from the simplest possible optimal training-time behavior
in order to achieve sufﬁcient skill. Relative Algorithmic Complexity provides us with a
metric to quantify this difference:GD is a measure of how much the shortest training-time
solution program needs to be edited in order to become an appropriate evaluation-time so-
lution program. If the shortest skill program that performs optimally during training also
happens to perform at a sufﬁcient skill level during evaluation, the task has zero general-
ization difﬁculty (i.e. it does not involve uncertainty). A generalizable skill program is one
that “covers more ground” in situation space than the exact training situations it is familiar
with: a program that is capable of dealing with future uncertainty.
Note that this deﬁnition of generalization difﬁculty may seem counter-intuitive. Oc-
cam’s razor principle would seem to suggest that the simplest program that works on the
training situations should also be a program that generalizes well. However, generalization
describes the capability to deal with future uncertainty, not the capability to compress the
behavior that would have been optimal in the past – being prepared for future uncertainty
has a cost, which is antagonistic to policy compression 9. By necessity,TrainSolopt
T,C does
away with any information or capability that isn’t strictly necessary in order to produce
the correct response to training situations, and in doing so, it may discard information or
capabilities that would have been useful to process evaluation situations. If it is in fact the
case that TrainSolopt
T,C does not need to discard any such information (i.e. the simplest
behavior that was optimal in the past is still sufﬁcient in the future), this implies that the
evaluation features no need for adaptation (no non-trivial novelty or uncertainty), and thus
the task does not involve generalization, potentially given some starting point (such as the
solution of another task).
Another way to express the same idea is that generalization requires to reinterpret the
9As a philosophical aside: this is why the education of children involves practicing games and ingesting knowl-
edge of seemingly no relevance to their past or present decision-making needs, but which prepare them for future
situations (a process often driven by curiosity). A 10-year-old who has only learned the simplest behavioral pol-
icy that would have maximized their extrinsic rewards (e.g. candy intake) during ages 0-10 would not be well
educated, and would not generalize well in future situations.
35


===== PAGE 36 =====
task when new data arrives (e.g. at evaluation time). This implies the need to store repre-
sentations of past data that would be seemingly useless from the perspective of the past but
may prove useful in the future. For example, consider the following labeled points along a
line: (x = −0.75,label =False ), (x = 0.15,label =True ), (x = −0.1,label =True ).
When training a classiﬁcation program on the ﬁrst two of these points, some of the shortest
optimal training-time solutions may beλ(x) :x> 0 orλ(x) :bool(ceil(x)). When applied
to the last point (x = −0.1,label =True ), these solutions would fail, while an algorithm
that instead stores all past data points and uses nearest-neighbors to return a response at
evaluation time would work. The nearest-neighbors program would be better prepared for
future uncertainty, but would take signiﬁcantly more space to write down.
Importantly, this ﬁrst deﬁnition of generalization difﬁculty only captures system-centric
generalization, as it quantiﬁes the difﬁculty of handling evaluation situations that differ
from training situations regardless of the system’s preexisting capabilities. To capture
developer-aware generalization, we need to take into account the system in its initial state
at the start of training,SkillProgramGen,ISUpdate,isState t=0:
Developer-aware Generalization Difﬁculty of a task for an intelligent system given
a curriculum C and a skill threshold θ, noted GDθ
IS,T,C : Fraction of the Algorithmic
Complexity of solution Solθ
T that is explained by TrainSolopt
T,C and the initial state of the
systemISt=0, i.e. length of the shortest program that, taking as input the initial system plus
the shortest possible program that performs optimally over the situations in curriculum C,
produces a skill program that performs at a skill level of at least θ during evaluation, nor-
malized by the length of that skill program. Note that this quantity is between 0 and 1 by
construction.
GDθ
IS,T,C =
H(Solθ
T|TrainSolopt
T,C,ISt=0)
H(Solθ
T )
In which we note:ISt=0 =SkillProgramGen,ISUpdate,isState t=0
Developer-aware generalization thus represents the amount of uncertainty about the short-
est evaluation-time solution given that you have at your disposal both the initial system
and the shortest training-time solution, i.e. the amount of modiﬁcations you would have to
make to the shortest training-time solution to obtain the evaluation-time solution, provided
that these edits can make use of the contents of the initial system.
Likewise, we can deﬁne the Generalization Difﬁculty from task T1 to task T2 (sufﬁcient
case) as H(Sol
θT2
T2 |Sol
θT1
T1 )/H(Sol
θT2
T2 ). We can also extend these deﬁnitions to a set of
tasks (e.g. Generalization Difﬁculty from a set of practice task to a set of test tasks), which
can be useful to quantify the Generalization Difﬁculty of an entire test suite. These notions
are related to the concept of intrinsic task difﬁculty (regardless of generalization) deﬁned
in [37] (section 8.6) as the effort necessary to construct a solution.
36


===== PAGE 37 =====
Next, we can also use Relative Algorithmic Complexity to formally quantify the Priors
PIS,T possessed by an intelligent system about a task:
Priors of an intelligent system relative to a taskT and a skill thresholdθ, notedPθ
IS,T :
Fraction of the Algorithmic Complexity of the shortest solution of T of skill threshold θ
that is explained by the initial system (at the start of the training phase). This is the length
(normalized by H(Solθ
T )) of the shortest possible program that, taking as input the initial
systemSkillProgramGen,ISUpdate,isState t=0 (notedISt=0), produces the shortest
solution of T that performs at a skill level of at least θ during evaluation. Note that the
intelligent system does not need to be able to produce this speciﬁc solution. Note that this
quantity is between 0 and 1 by construction.
Pθ
IS,T = H(Solθ
T )−H(Solθ
T|ISt=0)
H(Solθ
T )
“Priors” thus deﬁned can be interpreted as a measure of how close from a sufﬁcient or op-
timal solution the system starts, i.e. the “amount of relevant information” embedded in the
initial system. Note that this is different from the “amount of information” embedded in the
initial system (which would merely be the Algorithmic Complexity of the initial system).
As such, our measure only minimally penalizes large systems that contain prior knowledge
that is irrelevant to the task at hand (the only added cost is due to knowledge indexing and
retrieval overhead).
Further, we can use Relative Algorithmic Complexity to deﬁne the Experience EIS,T,C
accumulated by an intelligent system about a task during a curriculum.
Consider a single stept during training:
• Att, the system receives some new data in the form of the binary stringssituationt,
responset, and feedbackt (although responset may be omitted since, being the
output of a skill program previously generated by the IS , it can be assumed to be
known by theIS as soon assituationt is known).
• Only some of this data is relevant to solving the task (the data may be noisy or other-
wise uninformative).
• Only some of the data containsnovel information for the intelligent system (situations
and responses may be repetitive, and the intelligent system may be a slow learner that
needs information to be repeated multiple times or presented in multiple ways). Note
that we use the term “novel” to characterize information that would appear novel to
the system, rather than information that has never appeared before in the curriculum
(the difference between the two lies in the system’s learning efﬁciency).
We informally deﬁne the amount of experience accrued at stept as the amount of relevant,
novel information received by the system att. This corresponds to the amount of potential
37


===== PAGE 38 =====
uncertainty reduction about the solution that is made available by the task in the current
situation data and feedback data (i.e. how much the IS could reduce its uncertainty about
the solution using the step data if it were optimally intelligent).
Formally:
Experience accrued at stept, notedEθ
IS,T,t :
Eθ
IS,T,t =H(Solθ
T |ISt) −H(Solθ
T |ISt,datat)
In which we note:
• ISt =SkillProgramGen,ISUpdate,isState t
• datat =Situationt,responset,feedback t
By summing over all steps, we obtain the following deﬁnition of total experience (note that
we normalize by the Algorithmic Complexity of the solution considered, as we did for pri-
ors):
ExperienceEθ
IS,T,C over a curriculumC:
Eθ
IS,T,C = 1
H(Solθ
T )
∑
t
Eθ
IS,T,t
“Experience” thus deﬁned can be interpreted as a measure of the amount of relevant in-
formation received by the system about the task over the course of a curriculum, only
accounting for novel information at each step.
Because this is different from the “amount of information” contained in the curriculum
(i.e. the Algorithmic Complexity of the curriculum), our measure does not penalize systems
that go through noisy curricula.
In addition, because we use an eager sum of relevant and novel information at each step
instead of globally pooling the information content of the curriculum, we penalize learners
that are slower to absorb the relevant information that is presented to them.
Lastly, because our sum is different from “amount of relevant information (novel or not)
at each step summed over all steps”, we do not penalize systems that go through repetitive
curricula. If a fast learner absorbs sufﬁcient information over the ﬁrst ten steps of a ﬁxed
curriculum, but a slow learner needs 90 more steps of the same curriculum to achieve the
same, we will not count as experience for the fast learner the redundant last 90 steps during
which it did not learn anything, but we will count all 100 steps for the slow learner.
Deﬁning intelligence
We have now established sufﬁcient context and notations to formally express the intuitive
deﬁnition of intelligence stated earlier, “the intelligence of a system is a measure of its
skill-acquisition efﬁciency over a scope of tasks, with respect to priors, experience, and
38


===== PAGE 39 =====
generalization difﬁculty. ”
We consider an intelligent systemIS . We note CurθT
T the space of curricula that result in
IS generating a solution of sufﬁcient skill θT for a task T , and Curopt
T the space of cur-
ricula that result in IS generating its highest-skill solution (solution reaching the system’s
potentialθmax
T,IS ). Note that system’s potential may be lower than the optimal solution for
the task, as the system may not be able to learn to optimally solve the task.
To simplify notations, we will denoteθmax
T,IS as Θ. We noteAvg the averaging function
(used to average over task space). We notePC the probability of a given curriculumC.
We then deﬁne the intelligence ofI, tied to a scope of tasksscope, as:
Intelligence of systemIS overscope (sufﬁcient case):
IθT
IS,scope = Avg
T ∈scope
[
ωT ·θT Σ
C∈CurθT
T
[
PC ·
GDθT
IS,T,C
PθT
IS,T +EθT
IS,T,C
]]
Intelligence of systemIS overscope (optimal case):
Iopt
IS,scope = Avg
T ∈scope
[
ωT,Θ · Θ Σ
C∈Curopt
T
[
PC ·
GDΘ
IS,T,C
P Θ
IS,T +EΘ
IS,T,C
]]
Note that:
• PIS,T +EIS,T,C (priors plus experience) represents the total exposure of the sys-
tem to information about the problem, including the information it starts with at the
beginning of training.
• The sum over a curriculum subspace, weighted by the probability of each curriculum,
represents the expected outcome for the system after training. Note that the sum is
over a subspace of curricula (curricula that lead to at least a certain skill level), and
thus the probabilities would sum to a total lower than one: as such, we are penalizing
learners that only reach sufﬁcient skill or optimal skill some of the time.
• ωT ·θT represents the subjective value we place on achieving sufﬁcient skill at T ,
and ωT,Θ · Θ represents the subjective value we place on achieving the skill level
corresponding to the system’s full potentialθmax
T,IS atT .
• Schematically, the contribution of each task is: Expectation
[
skill·generalization
priors+experience
]
,
which is further weighted by a valueω which enables us to homogeneously compare
skill at different tasks independently of the scale of their respective scoring functions.
Thus, we equate the intelligence of a system to a measure of the information-efﬁciency
with which the system acquires its ﬁnal task-speciﬁc skill (sufﬁcient skill or highest possi-
39


===== PAGE 40 =====
ble skill) on average (probabilistic average over all applicable curricula), weighted by the
developer-aware generalization difﬁculty of the task considered (as well as the task value
ω, which makes skill commensurable across tasks), averaged over all tasks in the scope.
Or, in plain English: intelligence is the rate at which a learner turns its experience and
priors into new skills at valuable tasks that involve uncertainty and adaptation.
Note that our deﬁnition is not the ﬁrst formal deﬁnition of intelligence based on Algorith-
mic Information Theory. We are aware of three other AIT-based deﬁnitions: the C-Test
[40], the AIXI model [43], and the “Universal Intelligence” model [54] (closely related to
AIXI). It should be immediately clear to a reader familiar with these deﬁnitions that our
own approach represents a very different perspective.
We bring the reader’s attention to a number of key observations about our formalism (see
also II.2.3):
• A high-intelligence system is one that can generate high-skill solution programs for
high generalization difﬁculty tasks (i.e. tasks that feature high uncertainty about the
future) using little experience and priors, i.e. it is a system capable of making highly
efﬁcient use of all of the information it has at its disposition to cover as much ground
as possible in unknown parts of the situation space. Intelligence is, in a way, a con-
version rate between information about part of the situation space, and the ability
to perform well over a maximal area of future situation space, which will involve
novelty and uncertainty (ﬁgure 3).
• The measure of intelligence is tied to a choice of scope (space of tasks and value
function over tasks). It can also optionally be tied to a choice of sufﬁcient skill levels
across the tasks in the scope (sufﬁcient case).
• Skill is not possessed by an intelligent system, it is a property of the output artifact of
the process of intelligence (a skill program). High skill is not high intelligence: these
are different concepts altogether.
• Intelligence must involve learning and adaptation, i.e. operationalizing information
extracted from experience in order to handle future uncertainty: a system that starts
out with the ability to perform well on evaluation situations for a task would have a
very low developer-aware generalization difﬁculty for this task, and thus would score
poorly on our intelligence metric.
• Intelligence is not curve-ﬁtting: a system that merely produces the simplest possible
skill program consistent with known data points could only perform well on tasks that
feature zero generalization difﬁculty, by our deﬁnition. An intelligent system must
generate behavioral programs that account for future uncertainty.
• The measure of intelligence is tied to curriculum optimization: a better curriculum
space will lead to greater realized skill (on average) and to greater expressed intelli-
gence (greater skill-acquisition efﬁciency).
40


===== PAGE 41 =====
Figure 3: Higher intelligence “covers more ground” in future situation space using the same
information.
II.2.2 Computation efﬁciency, time efﬁciency, energy efﬁciency, and risk ef-
ﬁciency
In the above, we only considered the information-efﬁciency (prior-efﬁciency and experience-
efﬁciency with respect to generalization difﬁculty) of intelligent systems. Indeed, we be-
lieve this is the most actionable and relevant angle today to move AI research forward (cf
II.2.3). But it isn’t the only angle one may want to consider. Several alternatives that could
be incorporated into our deﬁnition in various ways (e.g. as a regularization term) come to
mind:
• Computation efﬁciency of skill programs: for settings in which training data is abun-
dant but inference-time computation is expensive, one may want to encourage the
generation of the skill programs that have minimal computational resource consump-
tion.
• Computation efﬁciency of the intelligent system: for settings in which training-time
computation is expensive, one may want to expend a minimal amount of computation
resources to generate a skill program.
• Time efﬁciency: in time-constrained settings, one may want to minimize the latency
with which the intelligent system generates skill programs.
• Energy efﬁciency: in biological systems in particular, one may want to minimize the
amount of energy expended in producing a skill program, in running a skill program,
or in going through a curriculum.
• Risk efﬁciency: for settings in which going through a curriculum (i.e. collecting
experience) involves risk for the intelligent system, one might want to encourage safe
curricula at the expense of resource efﬁciency or information efﬁciency. Much like
41


===== PAGE 42 =====
energy efﬁciency, this is highly relevant to biological systems and natural evolution,
in which certain novelty-seeking behaviors that would lead to faster learning may
also be more dangerous.
In fact, one may note that information efﬁciency acts in many settings as a proxy for
energy efﬁciency and risk efﬁciency.
We expect that these alternative ways to quantify efﬁciency will become relevant in
specialized AI application contexts in the future, and we bring them to the reader’s attention
to encourage others to develop new formal deﬁnitions of intelligence incorporating them in
addition to information efﬁciency.
II.2.3 Practical implications
The deﬁnitions above provide a formal framework as well as quantitative tools to reason
about the intuitive notions we have been introducing so far, in particular the concepts of
“generalization difﬁculty”, “intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency”, and what it means
to control for priors and experience when evaluating intelligence, as opposed to looking
purely at task-speciﬁc skill.
The main value of this framework is to provide an actionable perspective shift in how
we understand and evaluate ﬂexible or general artiﬁcial intelligence. We argue that this
perspective shift has the following practical consequences:
a. Consequences for research directions towards ﬂexible or general AI:
• It clearly spells out that the process of creating an intelligent system can be ap-
proached as an optimization problem, where the objective function would be a com-
putable approximation of our quantitative intelligence formula. As pointed out in
II.2.2, this objective function could be further reﬁned by incorporating regularization
terms that would take into account alternative forms of efﬁciency.
• It encourages a focus on developing broad or general-purpose abilities rather than
pursuing skill alone, by proposing a target metric that penalises excessive reliance on
experience or priors, and discounting tasks that feature low generalization difﬁculty.
• It encourages interest in program synthesis, by suggesting that we stop thinking of
“agents” as monolithic black boxes that take in sensory input and produce behavior (a
vision inherited from Reinforcement Learning [88]): our formalism clearly separates
the part of the system that possesses intelligence (“intelligent system”, a program-
synthesis engine) from the part that achieves skill or implements behavior (“skill
program”, the non-intelligent output artifact of the process of intelligence), and places
focus to the former. As we point out throughout this paper, we believe that this
confusion between process and artifact has been an ongoing fundamental issue in the
conceptualization of AI.
• It encourages interest in curriculum development, by leveraging the notion of an “op-
timal curriculum” and drawing attention to the fact that a better curriculum increases
the intelligence manifested by a learning system.
42


===== PAGE 43 =====
• It encourages interest in building systems based on human-like knowledge priors (e.g.
Core Knowledge) by drawing attention to the importance of priors in evaluating in-
telligence.
b. Consequences for evaluating ﬂexible or general AI systems:
• By deﬁning and quantifying generalization difﬁculty, it offers a way to formally rea-
son about what it means to perform “local generalization”, “broad generalization”,
and “extreme generalization” (cf. the spectrum of generalization introduced in I.3.2),
and to weed out tests that feature zero generalization difﬁculty.
• It suggests concrete guidelines for comparing AI and human intelligence: such a
comparison requires starting from a shared scope of tasks and shared priors, and
would seek to compare experience-efﬁciency in achieving speciﬁc levels of skill. We
detail this idea in II.3.1.
• It shows the importance of taking into account generalization difﬁculty when devel-
oping a test set to evaluate a task. We detail this idea in II.3.2. This should hopefully
lead us to evaluation metrics that are able to discard solutions that rely on shortcuts
that do not generalize (e.g. reliance on local textures as opposed to global semantics
in computer vision).
• It provides a set of practical questions to ask about any intelligent system to rigorously
characterize it:
– What is its scope?
– What is its “potential” over this scope (maximum achievable skill)?
– What priors does it possess?
– What is its skill-acquisition efﬁciency (intelligence)?
– What curricula would maximize its skill or skill-acquisition efﬁciency?
II.3 Evaluating intelligence in this light
Earlier in this document, we have detailed how measuring skill alone does not move us
forward when it comes to the development of broad abilities, we have suggested that AI
evaluation should learn from its more mature sister ﬁeld psychometrics (echoing the thesis
of Psychometric AI and Universal Psychometrics), and we have provided a new formalism
with practical implications for AI evaluation, pointing out the importance of the concept
of scope, potential, generalization difﬁculty, experience, and priors. The following section
summarizes key practical conclusions with respect to AI evaluation.
II.3.1 Fair comparisons between intelligent systems
We mentioned in II.2.3 that our formalism suggests concrete guidelines for comparing the
intelligence of systems of different nature, such as human intelligence and artiﬁcial in-
telligence. Being able to make such comparisons in a fair and rigorous way is essential to
43


===== PAGE 44 =====
progress towards human-like general AI. Here we argue how such intelligence comparisons
between systems entail speciﬁc requirements with regard to the target systems’ scope, po-
tential, and priors. We also detail how such comparisons should proceed given that these
requirements are met.
Scope and potential requirements. In II.1.2, we argued that intelligence is necessar-
ily tied to a scope of application, an idea also central to the formalism introduced in II.2.
As such, a comparison scale must be tied to a well-deﬁned scope of tasks that is shared by
the target systems (all target systems should be able to learn to perform the same tasks).
Further, we must consider that the target systems may have different potential (maxi-
mum achievable skill) over their shared scope. An intelligence comparison should focus
on skill-acquisition efﬁciency, but skill-acquisition efﬁciency cannot be meaningfully com-
pared between systems that arrive at vastly different levels of skills. As such,a comparison
scale must be tied to a ﬁxed threshold of skill over the scope of tasks considered. This skill
threshold should be achievable by all target systems.
For instance, comparing a generally-intelligent system to human intelligence would
only make sense if the scope of tasks that can be learned by the system is the same scope
of tasks that can be learned by a typical human, and the comparison should focus on the
efﬁciency with which the system achieves the same level of skill as a human expert. Com-
paring maximum realized skill does not constitute an intelligence comparison.
Prior knowledge requirements. Since the formalism of II.2 summarizes priors into
a single scalar score, which is homogeneous to the score used to quantify experience, it is
not strictly necessary for the two systems being compared to share the same priors. For
instance, if two systems achieve the same skill using the same amount of experience (the
exact nature of this experience, determined by the curriculum used, may differ), the system
that has the least amount of prior knowledge would be considered more intelligent.
However, it would be generally impractical to fully quantify prior knowledge. As such,
we recommend only comparing the intelligence of systems that assume a sufﬁciently similar
set of priors. This implies that any measure of intelligence should explicitly and exhaus-
tively list the priors it assumes, an idea we detail below, in II.3.2. Further, this implies that
systems that aim at implementing human-like general intelligence should leverage Core
Knowledge priors.
If the above conditions are met (shared scope, well-deﬁned skill threshold over scope,
and comparable knowledge priors), then a fair intelligence comparison would then consist
of contrasting the skill-acquisition efﬁciency proﬁle of the target systems. The more in-
telligent system would be the one that uses the least amount of experience to arrive at the
desired skill threshold in the average case. Alternatively, computation efﬁciency, energy
efﬁciency, and risk efﬁciency may also be considered, as per II.2.2.
44


===== PAGE 45 =====
II.3.2 What to expect of an ideal intelligence benchmark
The recommendations below synthesizes the conclusions of this document with regard to
the properties that a candidate benchmark of human-like general intelligence should pos-
sess.
• It should describe its scope of application and its own predictiveness with regard to
this scope (i.e. it should establish validity). In practice, this would be achieved by
empirically determining the statistical relationship between success on the benchmark
and success on a range of real-world tasks.
• It should be reliable (i.e. reproducible). If an evaluation session includes stochastic
elements, sampling different values for these elements should not meaningfully af-
fect the results. Different researchers independently evaluating the same system or
approach using the benchmark should arrive at the same conclusions.
• It should set out to measure broad abilities and developer-aware generalization:
– It should not be solely measuring skill or potential (maximum achievable skill).
– It should not feature in its evaluation set any tasks that are known in advance,
either to the test-taking system itself or to the developers of the system (cf.
developer-aware generalization as deﬁned in I.3.2).
– It should seek to quantify the generalization difﬁculty it measures (cf. formal
deﬁnition from II.2), or at least provide qualitative guidelines with regard to its
generalization difﬁculty: it should at least be made clear whether the benchmark
seeks to measure local generalization (robustness), broad generalization (ﬂexi-
bility), or extreme generalization (general intelligence), as deﬁned in I.3.2. Tak-
ing into account generalization difﬁculty minimizes the possibility that a given
benchmark could be “hacked” by solvers that take undesired shortcuts that by-
pass broad abilities (e.g. leveraging surface textures instead of semantic content
in image recognition).
• It should control for the amount of experience leveraged by test-taking systems dur-
ing training. It should not be possible to “buy” performance on the benchmark by
sampling unlimited training data. The benchmark should avoid tasks for which new
data can be generated at will. It should be, in effect, a game for which it is not possible
to practice in advance of the evaluation session.
• It should explicitly and exhaustively describe the set of priors it assumes. Any task
is going to involve priors, but in many tasks used for AI evaluation today, priors
stay implicit, and the existence of implicit hidden priors may often give an unfair
advantage to either humans or machines.
• It should work for both humans and machines, fairly, by only assuming the same
priors as possessed by humans (e.g. Core Knowledge) and only requiring a human-
sized amount of practice time or training data.
These recommendations for general AI evaluation wouldn’t be complete without a con-
crete effort to implement them. In part III, we present our initial attempt.
45


===== PAGE 46 =====
III A benchmark proposal: the ARC dataset
In this last part, we introduce the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), a dataset
intended to serve as a benchmark for the kind of general intelligence deﬁned in II.2. ARC
is designed to incorporate as many of the recommendations of II.3 as possible.
III.1 Description and goals
III.1.1 What is ARC?
ARC can be seen as a general artiﬁcial intelligence benchmark, as a program synthesis
benchmark, or as a psychometric intelligence test. It is targeted at both humans and artiﬁ-
cially intelligent systems that aim at emulating a human-like form of general ﬂuid intelli-
gence. It is somewhat similar in format to Raven’s Progressive Matrices [47], a classic IQ
test format going back to the 1930s.
ARC has the following top-level goals:
• Stay close in format to psychometric intelligence tests (while addressing issues found
in previous uses of such tests for AI evaluation, as detailed in III.1.3), so as to be
approachable by both humans and machines; in particular it should be solvable by
humans without any speciﬁc practice or training.
• Focus on measuring developer-aware generalization, rather than task-speciﬁc skill, by
only featuring novel tasks in the evaluation set (assumed unknown to the developer
of a test-taker).
• Focus on measuring a qualitatively “broad” form of generalization (cf. I.3.2), by
featuring highly abstract tasks that must be understood by a test-taker using very few
examples.
• Quantitatively control for experience by only providing a ﬁxed amount of training
data for each task and only featuring tasks that do not lend themselves well to artiﬁ-
cially generating new data.
• Explicitly describe the complete set of priors it assumes (listed in III.1.2), and en-
able a fair general intelligence comparison between humans and machines by only
requiring priors close to innate human prior knowledge (cf. II.3.2).
ARC comprises a training set and an evaluation set. The training set features 400 tasks,
while the evaluation set features 600 tasks. The evaluation set is further split into a public
evaluation set (400 tasks) and a private evaluation set (200 tasks). All tasks are unique, and
the set of test tasks and the set of training tasks are disjoint. The task data is available at
github.com/fchollet/ARC.
Each task consists of a small number of demonstration examples (3.3 on average), and
a small number of test examples (generally 1, although it may be 2 or 3 in rare cases). Each
example consists of an “input grid” and an “output grid”. Each “grid” is a literal grid of
46


===== PAGE 47 =====
symbols (each symbol is typically visualized via a unique color), as seen in ﬁgure 4. There
are 10 unique symbols (or colors). A grid can be any height or width between 1x1 and
30x30, inclusive (the median height is 9 and the median width is 10).
When solving an evaluation task, a test-taker has access to the training examples for the
task (both the input and output grids), as well as the input grid of the test examples for the
task. The test-taker must construct on its own the output grid corresponding to the input grid
of each test example. “Constructing the output grid” is done entirely from scratch, meaning
that the test-taker must decide what the height and width of the output grid should be, what
symbols it should place on the grid, and where. The task is successfully solved if the test-
taker can produce the exact correct answer on all test examples for the task (binary measure
of success). For each test example in a task, the test-taker (either human or machine) is
allowed 3 trials 10. The only feedback received after a trial is binary (correct answer or
incorrect answer). The score of an intelligent system on ARC is the fraction of tasks in
the evaluation set that it can successfully solve. Crucially, it is assumed that neither the
test-taker nor its developer would have had any prior information about the tasks featured
in the evaluation set: ARC seeks to measure “developer aware generalization” as deﬁned
in I.3.2. The existence of a private evaluation set enables us to strictly enforce this in the
setting of a public competition.
A test-taker is also assumed to have access to the entirety of the training set, although
the training data isn’t strictly necessary in order to be successful on the validation set, as all
tasks are unique and do not assume any knowledge other than the priors described in III.1.2.
A typical human can solve most of the ARC evaluation set without any previous training.
As such, the purpose of the training set primarily to serve as a development validation set
for AI system developers, or as a mock test for human test-takers. It could also be used as
a way to familiarize an algorithm with the content of Core Knowledge priors. We do not
expect that practice on the training set would increase human performance on the test set
(albeit this hypothesis would need to be concretely tested).
III.1.2 Core Knowledge priors
Any test of intelligence is going to involve prior knowledge. ARC seeks to control for its
own assumptions by explicitly listing the priors it assumes, and by avoiding reliance on
any information that isn’t part of these priors (e.g. acquired knowledge such as language).
The ARC priors are designed to be as close as possible to Core Knowledge priors, so as
to provide a fair ground for comparing human intelligence and artiﬁcial intelligence, as per
our recommendations in II.3.1.
The Core Knowledge priors assumed by ARC are as follows:
10We consider 3 trials to be enough to account for cases in which the task may be slightly ambiguous or in which
the test-taker may commit mechanical errors when inputting an answer grid.
47


===== PAGE 48 =====
Figure 4: A task where the implicit goal is to complete a symmetrical pattern. The nature of the
task is speciﬁed by three input/output examples. The test-taker must generate the output grid
corresponding to the input grid of the test input (bottom right).
a. Objectness priors:
Object cohesion: Ability to parse grids into “objects” based on continuity criteria including
color continuity or spatial contiguity (ﬁgure 5), ability to parse grids into zones, partitions.
Object persistence: Objects are assumed to persist despite the presence of noise (ﬁgure
6) or occlusion by other objects. In many cases (but not all) objects from the input persist
on the output grid, often in a transformed form. Common geometric transformations of
objects are covered in category 4, “basic geometry and topology priors”.
Figure 5: Left, objects deﬁned by spatial contiguity. Right, objects deﬁned by color continuity.
48


===== PAGE 49 =====
Figure 6: A denoising task.
Object inﬂuence via contact: Many tasks feature physical contact between objects (e.g.
one object being translated until it is in contact with another (ﬁgure 7), or a line “growing”
until it “rebounds” against another object (ﬁgure 8).
Figure 7: The red object “moves” towards the blue object until “contact”.
b. Goal-directedness prior:
While ARC does not feature the concept of time, many of the input/output grids can be
effectively modeled by humans as being the starting and end states of a process that in-
volves intentionality (e.g. ﬁgure 9). As such, the goal-directedness prior may not be strictly
necessary to solve ARC, but it is likely to be useful.
c. Numbers and Counting priors:
Many ARC tasks involve counting or sorting objects (e.g. sorting by size), comparing
numbers (e.g. which shape or symbol appears the most (e.g. ﬁgure 10)? The least? The
same number of times? Which is the largest object? The smallest? Which objects are the
same size?), or repeating a pattern for a ﬁxed number of time. The notions of addition and
subtraction are also featured (as they are part of the Core Knowledge number system as per
[85]). All quantities featured in ARC are smaller than approximately 10.
49


===== PAGE 50 =====
Figure 8: A task where the implicit goal is to extrapolate a diagonal line that “rebounds” upon
contact with a red obstacle.
d. Basic Geometry and Topology priors:
ARC tasks feature a range of elementary geometry and topology concepts, in particular:
• Lines, rectangular shapes (regular shapes are more likely to appear than complex
shapes).
• Symmetries (e.g. ﬁgure 11), rotations, translations.
• Shape upscaling or downscaling, elastic distortions.
• Containing / being contained / being inside or outside of a perimeter.
• Drawing lines, connecting points, orthogonal projections.
• Copying, repeating objects.
III.1.3 Key differences with psychometric intelligence tests
We have pointed out in I.3.4 the reasons why using existing psychometric intelligence tests
(or “IQ tests”) does not constitute a sound basis for AI evaluation. Albeit ARC stays delib-
erately close in format to traditional IQ tests (as well as related efforts such as Hern ´andez-
Orallo’s C-Test [40]), its design differs from them in fundamental ways. We argue that
these differences address the shortcomings of psychometric intelligence tests in the context
of AI evaluation. In particular:
• Unlike some psychometric intelligence tests, ARC is not interested in assessing crys-
tallized intelligence or crystallized cognitive abilities. ARC only assesses a general
form of ﬂuid intelligence, with a focus on reasoning and abstraction. ARC does
not involve language, pictures of real-world objects, or real-world common sense.
ARC seeks to only involve knowledge that stays close to Core Knowledge priors,
50


===== PAGE 51 =====
Figure 9: A task that combines the concepts of “line extrapolation”, “turning on obstacle”, and
“efﬁciently reaching a goal” (the actual task has more demonstration pairs than these three).
and avoids knowledge that would have to be acquired by humans via task-speciﬁc
practice.
• The tasks featured in the ARC evaluation set are unique and meant to be unknown to
developers of test-taking systems (as ARC seeks to assess developer-aware general-
ization). This prevents developers from solving the tasks themselves and hard-coding
their solution in program form. This can be strictly enforced in competition settings
via the existence of a private evaluation set.
• ARC has greater task diversity than typical psychometric intelligence tests (hundreds
of unique tasks with limited overlap between tasks), which reduces the likelihood that
hard-coding task-speciﬁc solutions would represent a practical shortcut for develop-
ers, even for the public evaluation set.
• Unlike tasks from the C-Test [40], ARC tasks are in majority not programmatically
generated. We perceive programmatic generation from a static “master” program
as a weakness, as it implies that merely reverse-engineering the generative program
shared across tasks (presumably a simple program, since it had to be written down by
the test developer) would be sufﬁcient to fully solve all tasks. Manual task generation
increases task diversity and reduces the risk of existence of an unforeseen shortcut
that could be used to by-pass the need for broad abilities in solving the test.
III.1.4 What a solution to ARC may look like, and what it would imply for
AI applications
We have found ARC to be fully solvable by humans. While many ARC test tasks are
intellectually challenging, human test-takers appear to be able to solve the majority of tasks
on their ﬁrst try without any practice or verbal explanations. Each task included in ARC
has been successfully solved by at least one member of a group of three high-IQ humans
51


===== PAGE 52 =====
Figure 10: A task where the implicit goal is to count unique objects and select the object that
appears the most times (the actual task has more demonstration pairs than these three).
Figure 11: Drawing the symmetrized version of a shape around a marker. Many tasks involve
some form of symmetry.
(who did not communicate with each other), which demonstrates task feasibility. In the
future, we hope to be able to further investigate human performance on ARC by gathering
a statistically signiﬁcant amount of human testing data, in particular with regard to the
relationship between CHC cognitive abilities and ARC performance.
Crucially, to the best of our knowledge, ARC does not appear to be approachable by
any existing machine learning technique (including Deep Learning), due to its focus on
broad generalization and few-shot learning, as well as the fact that the evaluation set only
features tasks that do not appear in the training set.
For a researcher setting out to solve it, ARC is perhaps best understood as a program
synthesis benchmark. Program synthesis [31, 32] is a subﬁeld of AI interested in the gener-
ation of programs that satisfy a high-level speciﬁcation, often provided in the form of pairs
of example inputs and outputs for the program – which is exactly the ARC format.
A hypothetical ARC solver may take the form of a program synthesis engine that uses
the demonstration examples of a task to generate candidates that transform input grids into
corresponding output grids. Schematically:
52


===== PAGE 53 =====
• Start by developing a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) capable of expressing all pos-
sible solution programs for any ARC task. Since the exact set of ARC tasks is pur-
posely not formally deﬁnable, this may be challenging (the space of tasks is deﬁned
as anything expressible in terms of ARC pairs that would only involve Core Knowl-
edge). It would require harding-coding the Core Knowledge priors from III.1.2 in a
sufﬁciently abstract and combinable program form, to serve as basis functions for a
kind of “human-like reasoning DSL”. We believe that solving this speciﬁc subprob-
lem is critical to general AI progress.
• Given a task, use the DSL to generate a set of candidate programs that turn the in-
puts grids into the corresponding output grids. This step would reuse and recombine
subprograms that previously proved useful in other ARC tasks.
• Select top candidates among these programs based on a criterion such as program
simplicity or program likelihood (such a criterion may be trained on solution pro-
grams previously generated using the ARC training set). Note that we do not expect
that merely selecting the simplest possible program that works on training pairs will
generalize well to test pairs (cf. our deﬁnition of generalization difﬁculty from II.2).
• Use the top three candidates to generate output grids for the test examples.
We posit that the existence of a human-level ARC solver would represent the ability to
program an AI from demonstrations alone (only requiring a handful of demonstrations to
specify a complex task) to do a wide range of human-relatable tasks of a kind that would
normally require human-level, human-like ﬂuid intelligence. As supporting evidence, we
note that human performance on psychometric intelligence tests (which are similar to ARC)
is predictive of success across all human cognitive tasks. Further, we posit that, since an
ARC solver and human intelligence would both be founded on the same knowledge priors,
the scope of application of an ARC solver would be close to that of human cognition,
making such a solver both practically valuable (i.e. it could solve useful, human-relevant
problems) and easy to interact with (i.e. it would readily understand human demonstrations
and would produce behavior that is in line with human expectations).
Our claims are highly speculative and may well prove fully incorrect, much like Newell’s
1973 hopes that progress on chess playing would translate into meaningful progress on
achieving a range of broad cognitive abilities – especially if ARC turns out to feature un-
foreseen vulnerabilities to unintelligent shortcuts. We expect our claims to be validated or
invalidated in the near future once we make sufﬁcient progress on solving ARC.
III.2 Weaknesses and future reﬁnements
It is important to note that ARC is a work in progress, not a deﬁnitive solution; it does not
ﬁt all of the requirements listed in II.3.2, and it features a number of key weaknesses:
• Generalization is not quantiﬁed. While ARC is explicitly designed to measure
“broad generalization” as opposed to “local generalization” or “extreme generaliza-
tion”, we do not offer a quantitative measure of the generalization of the evaluation
53


===== PAGE 54 =====
set given the test set, or the generalization difﬁculty of each task (considered inde-
pendently). We plan on conducting future work to empirically address this issue by
using human performance on a task (considered over many human subjects) to esti-
mate the generalization difﬁculty it represents. We would be particularly interested
in attempting to correlate human performance on a task with an approximation of
the AIT measure of generalization difﬁculty proposed in II.2 (such an approximation
should become available as we make progress on ARC solver programs). Finding
high correlation, or a lack of correlation, would provide a degree of validation or
invalidation of our formal measure.
• Test validity is not established. Validity represents the predictiveness of test perfor-
mance with regard to performance on other non-test activities. The validity of ARC
should be investigated via large-sample size statistical studies on humans, following
the process established by psychometrics. Further, when AI ARC solvers become
a reality, we will also be able to study how well ARC performance translates into
real-world usefulness across a range of tasks.
• Dataset size and diversity may be limited. ARC only features 1,000 tasks in total,
and there may be some amount of conceptual overlap across many tasks. This could
make ARC potentially vulnerable to shortcut strategies that could solve the tasks
without featuring intelligence. We plan on running public AI competitions (using the
private evaluation set) as a way to crowd-source attempts to produce such shortcuts (if
a shortcut exists, it should arise quickly in a competition setting). Further, to mitigate
potential vulnerability against such shortcuts, we intend to keep adding new tasks to
ARC in the future, possibly by crowd-sourcing them.
• The evaluation format is overly close-ended and binary. The score of a test-taker
on an evaluation task is either 0 or 1, which lacks granularity. Further, real-world
problem-solving often takes the form of an interactive process where hypotheses are
formulated by the test-taker then empirically tested, iteratively. In ARC, this approach
is possible to an extent since the test-taker is allowed 3 trials for each test example
in a task. However, this format remains overly limiting. A better approach may be
let the test taker dynamically interact with an example generator for the task: the test
taker would be able to ask for a new test input at will, would propose a solution for
the test input, and would receive feedback on their solution, repeatedly, until the test-
taker is reliably able to produce the correct answer. The test-taker’s score on the task
would then be a measure of the amount of feedback it required until it became able
to reliably generate the correct solution for any new input. This represents a more
direct measure of intelligence as formally deﬁned in II.2, where the input generator
is in control of the curriculum.
• Core Knowledge priors may not be well understood and may not be well cap-
tured in ARC. Central to ARC is the notion that it only relies on innate human prior
knowledge and does not feature signiﬁcant amounts of acquired knowledge. How-
ever, the exact nature of innate human prior knowledge is still an open problem, and
whether these priors are correctly captured in ARC is unclear.
54


===== PAGE 55 =====
III.3 Possible alternatives
ARC is merely one attempt to create a human-like general intelligence benchmark that
embodies as many of the guidelines listed in II.3 as possible. While ARC stays very close
to the format of psychometric intelligence tests, many other possible approaches could be
explored. In this section, we offer some suggestions for alternatives.
III.3.1 Repurposing skill benchmarks to measure broad generalization
We noted in I.3.5 the ongoing fascination of the AI research community in developing
systems that surpass human skill at board games and video games. We propose repurposing
such tests of skills into tests of intelligence.
Consider an AI developer interested in solving gameX. While the AI would be trained
on instances of X, an evaluation arbiter would create multiple variants of X (X1, X2,
Xn). These alternative games would be designed to represent a meaningful amount of
generalization difﬁculty overX (as deﬁned in II.2): the simplest game-playing program
that is optimal on instances of X (e.g. game levels of X) would not be optimal on Xi.
As such, these alternative games would not be mere “new levels” of X, but would feature
related-yet-novel gameplay, so as to measure broad generalization as opposed to local gen-
eralization. These alternative games would stay unknown to the AI developers, so as to
measure developer-aware generalization. This proposed setup is thus markedly different
from e.g. CoinRun [17] or Obstacle Tower [49], where the evaluation environments are not
alternative games, but only levels of the same game (local generalization, or generalization
to known unknowns), randomly sampled from a level generator which is known in advance
to the AI developers (no evaluation of developer-aware generalization).
The AI trained on X, once ready, would then be tasked with learning to solve X1,
Xn. Its evaluation score would then be a measure of the amount of experience it required
on each alternative game in order to reach a speciﬁc threshold of skill, modulated by the
amount of generalization difﬁculty represented by each alternative game. A measure of the
general intelligence of such an AI would then be an average of these evaluation scores over
a large number of different source gamesX.
For instance, consider the game DotA2: an AI trained on DotA2 may be evaluated by
measuring the efﬁciency with which it can learn to play new games from the same genre,
such as League of Legends or Heroes of the Storm. As an even simpler (but weaker)
alternative, an AI trained on 16 speciﬁc DotA2 characters may be evaluated by measuring
the efﬁciency with which it can learn to master a set of brand new characters it would not
have played before – for example, a strong human DotA2 player can play at a high level
with a new character upon ﬁrst try.
III.3.2 Open-ended adversarial or collaborative approaches
We have pointed out in III.2 some of the key limitations of having to craft evaluation tasks
manually: it is a labor-intensive process that makes it difﬁcult to formally control for gen-
eralization difﬁculty, that could potentially result in a low-diversity set of tasks, and that
55


===== PAGE 56 =====
is not easily scalable (although crowd-sourcing tasks may partially address this problem).
The diversity and scalablility points are especially critical given that we need a constant
supply of substantially new tasks in order to guarantee that the benchmark is measuring
developer-aware generalization.
A solution may be to instead programmatically generate new tasks. We noted in III.1.3
that programmatic generation from a static “master” program is not desirable, as it places a
ceiling on the diversity and complexity of the set of tasks that can be generated, and it offers
a potential avenue to “cheat” on the benchmark by reverse-engineering the master program.
We propose instead to generate tasks via an ever-learning program called a “teacher” pro-
gram, interacting in a loop with test-taking systems, called “student” programs (ﬁgure 12).
The teacher program would optimize task generation for novelty and interestingness for a
given student (tasks should be new and challenging, while still being solvable by the stu-
dent), while students would evolve to learn to solve increasingly difﬁcult tasks. This setup
is also favorable to curriculum optimization, as the teacher program may be conﬁgured to
seek to optimize the learning efﬁciency of its students. This idea is similar to the “anytime
intelligence test” proposed in [38] and to the POET system proposed in [96].
In order to make sure that the space of generated tasks retains sufﬁcient complexity and
novelty over time, the teacher program should draw information from an external source
(assumed to feature incompressible complexity), such as the real world. This external
source of complexity makes the setup truly open-ended. A teacher program that generates
novel tasks that partially emulate human-relevant tasks would have the added advantage
that it would guide the resulting student programs towards a form of intelligence that could
transfer to real-world human-relevant problems.
Figure 12: Teacher-student learning and evaluation system.
Taking stock
The study of general artiﬁcial intelligence is a ﬁeld still in its infancy, and we do not wish to
convey the impression that we have provided a deﬁnitive solution to the problem of charac-
terizing and measuring the intelligence held by an AI system. Rather, we have introduced
a new perspective on deﬁning and evaluating intelligence, structured around the following
ideas:
56


===== PAGE 57 =====
• Intelligence is the efﬁciency with which a learning system turns experience and priors
into skill at previously unknown tasks.
• As such, a measure of intelligence must account for priors, experience, and general-
ization difﬁculty.
• All intelligence is relative to a scope of application. Two intelligent systems may only
be meaningfully compared within a shared scope and if they share similar priors.
• As such, general AI should be benchmarked against human intelligence and should
be founded on a similar set of knowledge priors (e.g. Core Knowledge).
We also have provided a new formalism based on Algorithmic Information Theory (cf.
II.2) to rigorously and quantitatively reason about these ideas, as well as a set of concrete
guidelines to follow for developing a benchmark of general intelligence (cf. II.3.1 and
II.3.2).
Our deﬁnition, formal framework, and evaluation guidelines, which do not capture all
facets of intelligence, were developed to be actionable, explanatory, and quantiﬁable, rather
than being descriptive, exhaustive, or consensual. They are not meant to invalidate other
perspectives on intelligence, rather, they are meant to serve as a useful objective function to
guide research on broad AI and general AI, as outlined in II.2.3. Our hope is for some part
of the AI community interested in general AI to break out of a longstanding and ongoing
trend of seeking to achieve raw skill at challenging tasks, given unlimited experience and
unlimited prior knowledge.
To ground our ideas and enable others to build upon them, we are also providing an
actual benchmark, the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus, or ARC:
• ARC takes the position that intelligence testing should control for scope, priors, and
experience: every test task should be novel (measuring the ability to understand a
new task, rather than skill) and should assume an explicit set of priors shared by all
test-takers.
• ARC explicitly assumes the same Core Knowledge priors innately possessed by hu-
mans.
• ARC can be fully solved by humans, but cannot be meaningfully approached by
current machine learning techniques, including Deep Learning.
• ARC may offer an interesting playground for AI researchers who are interested in
developing algorithms capable of human-like broad generalization. It could also offer
a way to compare human intelligence and machine intelligence, as we assume the
same priors.
Importantly, ARC is still a work in progress, with known weaknesses listed in III.2. We
plan on further reﬁning the dataset in the future, both as a playground for research and as a
joint benchmark for machine intelligence and human intelligence.
The measure of the success of our message will be its ability to divert the attention
of some part of the community interested in general AI, away from surpassing humans at
57


===== PAGE 58 =====
tests of skill, towards investigating the development of human-like broad cognitive abilities,
through the lens of program synthesis, Core Knowledge priors, curriculum optimization,
information efﬁciency, and achieving extreme generalization through strong abstraction.
References
[1] Sam S Adams, Guruduth Banavar, and Murray Campbell. I-athlon: Towards a mul-
tidimensional turing test. AI Magazine, (1):78–84, 2016.
[2] John R. Anderson and Christian Lebiere. The newell test for a theory of cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, pages 587–601, 2003.
[3] Aristotle. De Anima. c. 350 BC.
[4] Minoru Asada et al. Cognitive developmental robotics: A survey.IEEE Transactions
on Autonomous Mental Development, pages 12–34, 2009.
[5] Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit Ogale. Chauffeurnet: Learn-
ing to drive by imitating the best and synthesizing the worst. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.03079, 2018.
[6] Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade
learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Int. Res.,
(1):253–279, May 2013.
[7] Benjamin Beyret, Jos Hernndez-Orallo, Lucy Cheke, Marta Halina, Murray Shana-
han, and Matthew Crosby. The animal-ai environment: Training and testing animal-
like artiﬁcial cognition, 2019.
[8] Alfred Binet and Thodore Simon. Mthodes nouvelles pour le diagnostic du niveau
intellectuel des anormaux. L’anne psychologique, pages 191–244, 1904.
[9] Selmer Bringsjord and Bettina Schimanski. What is artiﬁcial intelligence? psycho-
metric ai as an answer. In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI’03, pages 887–893, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2003.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[10] Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee.
Sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion,
2018.
[11] Martin Buehler, Karl Iagnemma, and Sanjiv Singh. The 2005 DARPA Grand Chal-
lenge: The Great Robot Race . Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st
edition, 2007.
[12] Murray Campbell, A. Joseph Hoane, Jr., and Feng-hsiung Hsu. Deep blue. Artif.
Intell., (1-2):57–83, 2002.
[13] Raymond B. Cattell. Abilities: Their structure, growth, and action. 1971.
[14] G. Chaitin. Algorithmic Information Theory. Cambridge University Press, 1987.
58


===== PAGE 59 =====
[15] Gregory J Chaitin. A theory of program size formally identical to information theory.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), (3):329–340, 1975.
[16] Francois Chollet. Deep Learning with Python. Manning Publications, 2017.
[17] Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Christopher Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman.
Quantifying generalization in reinforcement learning. CoRR, 2018.
[18] Ebinepre A Cocodia. Cultural perceptions of human intelligence. Journal of Intelli-
gence, 2(4):180–196, 2014.
[19] L. Cosmides and J. Tooby. Origins of domain speciﬁcity: the evolution of functional
organization. page 85116, 1994.
[20] Linda Crocker and James Algina. Introduction to classical and modern test theory.
ERIC, 1986.
[21] Charles Darwin. The Origin of Species. 1859.
[22] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-
Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In CVPR09, 2009.
[23] D. K. Detterman. A challenge to watson. Intelligence, page 7778, 2011.
[24] T.G. Evans. A program for the solution of a class of geometric-analogy intelligence-
test questions. pages 271–353, 1968.
[25] James R Flynn. What is intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn effect. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2007.
[26] Richard M Friedberg. A learning machine: Part i. IBM Journal of Research and
Development, 2(1):2–13, 1958.
[27] Manuela Veloso Gary Marcus, Francesca Rossi. Beyond the Turing Test (workshop),
2014.
[28] B. Goertzel and C. Pennachin, editors. Artiﬁcial general intelligence. Springer, New
York, 2007.
[29] Bert F Green Jr. Intelligence and computer simulation. Transactions of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1964.
[30] Peter D. Gr ¨unwald and Paul M. B. Vit´anyi. Algorithmic information theory. 2008.
[31] Sumit Gulwani, Jos ´e Hern´andez-Orallo, Emanuel Kitzelmann, Stephen H Muggle-
ton, Ute Schmid, and Benjamin Zorn. Inductive programming meets the real world.
Communications of the ACM, 58(11):90–99, 2015.
[32] Sumit Gulwani, Alex Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. Program Synthesis. 2017.
[33] William H. Guss, Cayden Codel, Katja Hofmann, Brandon Houghton, Noburu
Kuno, Stephanie Milani, Sharada Prasanna Mohanty, Diego Perez Liebana, Rus-
lan Salakhutdinov, Nicholay Topin, Manuela Veloso, and Phillip Wang. The minerl
competition on sample efﬁcient reinforcement learning using human priors. CoRR,
2019.
59


===== PAGE 60 =====
[34] R. Hambleton, H. Swaminathan, and H. Rogers. Fundamentals of Item Response
Theory. Sage Publications, Inc., 1991.
[35] Islam R. Bachman P. Pineau J. Precup D. Henderson, P. and D. Meger. Deep rein-
forcement learning that matters. 2018.
[36] Jos ´e Hern ´andez-Orallo. Evaluation in artiﬁcial intelligence: from task-oriented to
ability-oriented measurement. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, pages 397–447, 2017.
[37] Jos ´e Hern´andez-Orallo. The Measure of All Minds: Evaluating Natural and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
[38] Jos ´e Hern´andez-Orallo and David L Dowe. Measuring universal intelligence: To-
wards an anytime intelligence test.Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 174(18):1508–1539, 2010.
[39] Jos ´e Hern´andez-Orallo, David L. Dowe, and M.Victoria Hern ´andez-Lloreda. Uni-
versal psychometrics. Cogn. Syst. Res., (C):50–74, March 2014.
[40] Jos ´e Hern ´andez-Orallo and Neus Minaya-Collado. A formal deﬁnition of intelli-
gence based on an intensional variant of algorithmic complexity. 1998.
[41] G.E. Hinton. How neural networks learn from experience. Mind and brain: Read-
ings from the Scientiﬁc American magazine, page 113124, 1993.
[42] Thomas Hobbes. Human Nature: or The fundamental Elements of Policie. 1650.
[43] Marcus Hutter. Universal artiﬁcial intelligence: Sequential decisions based on al-
gorithmic probability. Springer Science & Business Media, 2004.
[44] D.L. Dowe J. Hernndez-Orallo. Iq tests are not for machines, yet. Intelligence, page
7781, 2012.
[45] Yiding Jiang, Dilip Krishnan, Hossein Mobahi, and Samy Bengio. Predicting the
generalization gap in deep networks with margin distributions. ArXiv, 2018.
[46] Jason Jo and Yoshua Bengio. Measuring the tendency of cnns to learn surface sta-
tistical regularities. ArXiv, 2017.
[47] Raven J. John. Raven Progressive Matrices. Springer, Boston, MA, 2003.
[48] Wendy Johnson and Thomas J.Bouchard Jr. The structure of human intelligence: It is
verbal, perceptual, and image rotation (vpr), not ﬂuid and crystallized. Intelligence,
pages 393–416, 2005.
[49] Arthur Juliani, Ahmed Khalifa, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Jonathan Harper, Ervin Teng,
Hunter Henry, Adam Crespi, Julian Togelius, and Danny Lange. Obstacle tower: A
generalization challenge in vision, control, and planning.Proceedings of the Twenty-
Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Aug 2019.
[50] Niels Justesen, Ruben Rodriguez Torrado, Philip Bontrager, Ahmed Khalifa, Ju-
lian Togelius, and Sebastian Risi. Illuminating generalization in deep reinforcement
learning through procedural level generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10729 ,
2018.
60


===== PAGE 61 =====
[51] Brenden M. Lake, Tomer D. Ullman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Samuel J. Gersh-
man. Building machines that learn and think like people. CoRR, 2016.
[52] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature,
(7553):436, 2015.
[53] Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter. A collection of deﬁnitions of intelligence. 2007.
[54] Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter. Universal intelligence: A deﬁnition of machine
intelligence. Minds and machines, 17(4):391–444, 2007.
[55] Ming Li, Paul Vit ´anyi, et al. An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its
applications, volume 3. Springer.
[56] John Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. 1689.
[57] James Macgregor and Yun Chu. Human performance on the traveling salesman and
related problems: A review. The Journal of Problem Solving, 3, 02 2011.
[58] James Macgregor and Thomas Ormerod. Human performance on the traveling sales-
man problem. Perception & psychophysics, 58:527–39, 06 1996.
[59] Gary Marcus. Deep learning: A critical appraisal. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00631,
2018.
[60] John McCarthy. Generality in artiﬁcial intelligence. Communications of the ACM,
30(12):1030–1035, 1987.
[61] Pamela McCorduck. Machines Who Think: A Personal Inquiry into the History and
Prospects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. AK Peters Ltd, 2004.
[62] Kevin McGrew. The cattell-horn-carroll theory of cognitive abilities: Past, present,
and future. Contemporary Intellectual Assessment: Theories, Tests, and Issues , 01
2005.
[63] Marvin Minsky. Society of mind. Simon and Schuster, 1988.
[64] May-Britt Moser, David C Rowland, and Edvard I Moser. Place cells, grid cells, and
memory. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology, 7(2):a021808, 2015.
[65] Shane Mueller, Matt Jones, Brandon Minnery, Ph Julia, and M Hiland. The bica cog-
nitive decathlon: A test suite for biologically-inspired cognitive agents.Proceedings
of the 16th Conference on Behavior Representation in Modeling and Simulation ,
2007.
[66] A. Newell. You cant play 20 questions with nature and win: Projective comments
on the papers of this symposium. 1973.
[67] Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David McAllester, and Nati Srebro. Ex-
ploring generalization in deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pages 5947–5956, 2017.
[68] Ian Osband, Yotam Doron, Matteo Hessel, John Aslanides, Eren Sezener, Andre
Saraiva, Katrina McKinney, Tor Lattimore, Csaba Szepezvari, Satinder Singh, et al.
Behaviour suite for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03568, 2019.
61


===== PAGE 62 =====
[69] A. E. Howe P. R. Cohen. How evaluation guides ai research: the message still counts
more than the medium. AI Mag, page 35, 1988.
[70] Charles Packer, Katelyn Gao, Jernej Kos, Philipp Kr ¨ahenb¨uhl, Vladlen Koltun, and
Dawn Xiaodong Song. Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement learning.
ArXiv, 2018.
[71] Diego Perez-Liebana, Katja Hofmann, Sharada Prasanna Mohanty, Noboru Sean
Kuno, Andre Kramer, Sam Devlin, Raluca D. Gaina, and Daniel Ionita. The multi-
agent reinforcement learning in malm (marl) competition. Technical report, 2019.
[72] Diego Perez-Liebana, Jialin Liu, Ahmed Khalifa, Raluca D Gaina, Julian Togelius,
and Simon M Lucas. General video game ai: a multi-track framework for evaluating
agents, games and content generation algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10363,
2018.
[73] Joelle Pineau. Reproducible, Reusable, and Robust Reinforcement Learning, 2018.
Neural Information Processing Systems.
[74] S. Pinker. The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. Viking, New York,
2002.
[75] David M. W. Powers. The total Turing test and the loebner prize. In New Methods
in Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning, 1998.
[76] Lowrey K. Todorov E. V . Rajeswaran, A. and S. M. Kakade. Towards generalization
and simplicity in continuous control. 2017.
[77] Fred Reed. Promise of AI not so bright, 2006.
[78] Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Emile, or On Education. 1762.
[79] & McClelland J.L. Rumelhart, D.E. Distributed memory and the representation of
general and speciﬁc information.Journal of Experimental Psychology, page 159188,
1985.
[80] P. Sanghi and D. L. Dowe. A computer program capable of passing iq tests. page
570575, 2003.
[81] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew
Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel,
et al. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general reinforcement learning
algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815, 2017.
[82] David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja
Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton,
et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354,
2017.
[83] C. E. Spearman. ‘general intelligence’, objectively determined and measured. Amer-
ican Journal of Psychology, page 201293, 1904.
[84] C. E. Spearman. The Abilities of Man. Macmillan, London, 1927.
62


===== PAGE 63 =====
[85] Elizabeth S. Spelke and Katherine D. Kinzler. Core knowledge. Developmental
science, pages 89–96, 2007.
[86] Robert Sternberg. Culture and intelligence. The American psychologist, 59:325–38,
07 2004.
[87] Robert Sternberg and Douglas Detterman. What is Intelligence? Contemporary
Viewpoints on Its Nature and Deﬁnition. 1986.
[88] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction
(Second Edition). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2018.
[89] OpenAI team. OpenAI Five , 2019. https://openai.com/blog/
openai-five/ Accessed: 2019-09-30.
[90] OpenAI team. OpenAI Five Arena Results , 2019. https://arena.openai.
com/#/results Accessed: 2019-09-30.
[91] A. M. Turing. Computing machinery and intelligence. 1950.
[92] Vladimir N. Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory . Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 1995.
[93] Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha
Vezhnevets, Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich K ¨uttler, John Agapiou, Ju-
lian Schrittwieser, John Quan, Stephen Gaffney, Stig Petersen, Karen Simonyan,
Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Kevin Calderone,
Paul Keet, Anthony Brunasso, David Lawrence, Anders Ekermo, Jacob Repp, and
Rodney Tsing. Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement learning. ArXiv,
abs/1708.04782, 2017.
[94] Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael,
Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark
for general-purpose language understanding systems. 2019.
[95] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R
Bowman. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language
understanding. 2018.
[96] Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Paired open-ended
trailblazer (poet): Endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning
environments and their solutions. ArXiv, abs/1901.01753, 2019.
[97] David H Wolpert. What the no free lunch theorems really mean; how to improve
search algorithms.
[98] D.H. Wolpert and W.G. Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, pages 67–82, 1997.
[99] Stephen G. Wozniak. Three minutes with steve wozniak. PC World, 2007.
[100] Shih-Ying Yang and Robert J Sternberg. Taiwanese chinese people’s conceptions of
intelligence. Intelligence, 25(1):21–36, 1997.
63


===== PAGE 64 =====
[101] Amy Zhang, Nicolas Ballas, and Joelle Pineau. A dissection of overﬁtting and gen-
eralization in continuous reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07937,
2018.
[102] Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals.
Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization. 2017.
64