

===== PAGE 1 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models
DEEP GANGULI∗, DANNY HERNANDEZ∗, LIANE LOVITT∗, NOVA DASSARMA† , TOM HENIGHAN† ,
ANDY JONES† , NICHOLAS JOSEPH† , JACKSON KERNION† , BEN MANN† , AMANDA ASKELL,
YUNTAO BAI, ANNA CHEN, TOM CONERLY, DAWN DRAIN, NELSON ELHAGE, SHEER EL
SHOWK, STANISLAV FORT, ZAC HATFIELD-DODDS, SCOTT JOHNSTON, SHAUNA KRAVEC,
NEEL NANDA, KAMAL NDOUSSE, CATHERINE OLSSON, DANIELA AMODEI, TOM BROWN,
JARED KAPLAN, SAM MCCANDLISH, CHRIS OLAH, DARIO AMODEI, and JACK CLARK ‡ §,
Anthropic, USA
Large-scale pre-training has recently emerged as a technique for creating capable, general-purpose, generative models such as GPT-3,
Megatron-Turing NLG, Gopher, and many others. In this paper, we highlight a counterintuitive property of such models and discuss
the policy implications of this property. Namely, these generative models have a paradoxical combination of predictable loss on a broad
training distribution (as embodied in their "scaling laws"), and unpredictable specific capabilities, inputs, and outputs. We believe that
the high-level predictability and appearance of useful capabilities drives rapid development of such models, while the unpredictable
qualities make it difficult to anticipate the consequences of model deployment. We go through examples of how this combination
can lead to socially harmful behavior with examples from the literature and real world observations, and we also perform two novel
experiments to illustrate our point about harms from unpredictability. Furthermore, we analyze how these conflicting properties
combine to give model developers various motivations for deploying these models, and challenges that can hinder deployment. We
conclude with a list of possible interventions the AI community may take to increase the chance of these models having a beneficial
impact. We intend this paper to be useful to policymakers who want to understand and regulate AI systems, technologists who care
about the potential policy impact of their work, funders who want to support work addressing these challenges, and academics who
want to analyze, critique, and potentially develop large generative models.
ACM Reference Format:
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Jackson Kernion,
Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Zac
Hatfield-Dodds, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Neel Nanda, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Daniela Amodei, Tom Brown, Jared
Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Dario Amodei, and Jack Clark. 2022. Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models . In
2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’22), June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533229
1 INTRODUCTION
Scaling up the amount of data, compute power, and model parameters of neural networks has recently led to the
arrival (and real world deployment) of capable generative models such as CLIP [61], Ernie 3.0 Titan [81], FLAN [82],
∗Core Research Contributors
†Core Infrastructure Contributors
‡Correspondence to: jack@anthropic.com
§Author contributions are listed in Appendix A.1
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party
components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2202.07785v2  [cs.CY]  3 Oct 2022


===== PAGE 2 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
Gopher [62], GPT-3 [11], HyperClova [46], Jurassic-1-Jumbo [51], Megatron Turing NLG [72], LaMDA [78], Pan Gu
[89], Yuan 1.0 [87], and more. For this class of models1 the relationship between scale and model performance is often
so predictable that it can be described in a lawful relationship — a scaling law. In most cases, these scaling laws predict
a continued increase in certain capabilities as models get larger. At the same time, larger generative models represent
an increasing proportion of the eye-catching results in machine learning. As a result, many institutions have started
producing large models over the past few years, in response to the predictability afforded by scaling laws, and the fact
these models can be plugged into systems that generate economic value, like search engines.2 It has also become clear
that these models present novel risks of harmful behavior, which are difficult to predict and may become more severe
as the models increase in capability. Attempts to study these harms with smaller models may not accurately reflect
what occurs in larger ones.
In this paper, we attempt to better understand the influence of scaling laws on the dynamics of large-scale model
development and deployment, with a focus on large language models.Our basic thesis is that large generative mod-
els have a paradoxical combination of high predictability — model loss improves in relation to resources
expended on training, and tends to correlate loosely with improved performance on many tasks — and
high unpredictability — specific model capabilities, inputs, and outputs can’t be predicted ahead of time.
The former drives rapid development of such models while the latter makes it difficult to anticipate the
consequences of their development and deployment. We go through examples of how this combination can lead
to socially harmful behavior, while also analyzing the motivations and challenges that developers of such models will
face. Our goal in this paper is to outline how and why we expect these models to be developed, so we can identify
interventions to guide model development. We conclude with some policy recommendations that could increase the
safety of large-scale model deployments, and improve the incentive structure for developers building these models.
Though all of the individual points about scaling laws, open-endedness, or the proliferation of large models are explicitly
or implicitly presented in other research, our contribution here is to highlight the complete picture together with its
implications.
Although we focus on scaling laws, many of our points complement related work on the societal risks of deploying
large models [7, 9, 21, 44, 75, 83]. However, similarly to [83], we do not consider here the costs of human labor involved
in creating and annotating training data [30], the ethics of supply chains involved in creating the requisite hardware
on which to train models [19], or the environmental costs of training models [7, 56, 69, 74]. Scaling laws are likely to
significantly impact these issues.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we articulate and support our central thesis about
large generative models by decomposing it into four claims, each of which we support with evidence from previously
published data, and in some cases, with novel experiments on large language models [ 3]. In Section 2.1 we discuss
smooth general capability scaling. More precisely, by general capability scaling we mean two things. First, the training
(and test) loss improves predictably with scale on a broad data distribution. Second, this improvement in loss tends to
correlate on average with increased performance on a number of downstream tasks [11, 62]. We refer to the combination
of these two properties throughout the paper as smooth general capability (or performance) scaling.3 In Section 2.2,
1Some refer to this class of models as ‘foundation models’ [9].
2We do not discuss to whom this economic value accrues, and we do not intend to imply that by default it will accrue broadly or that no one will be
harmed.
3Note that, as will be discussed later as the central thesis of the paper, smooth general capability scaling does not imply smooth scaling on any particular
task. It also does not imply that the tasks typically measured are the only tasks that are important; indeed the presence of unmeasured tasks is part of our
thesis.
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
10 9
10 7
10 5
10 3
10 1
101
Compute (Petaflop-Days)
2
3
4
5
6
7Test Loss
Scaling Law for Compute
Scaling Law
Data
108
109
Dataset Size (tokens)
3
4
Scaling Law for Data
104
105
106
107
108
109
Number of Parameters
2
3
4
5
6
Scaling Law for Model Size
Fig. 1 Scaling laws reliably predict that model performance (y-axes) improves with increasing compute (Left), training data
(Middle), and model size (Right). In all cases a power-law (straight line, black) fits the empirically observed data (blue) exceptionally
well. Figure adapted from [43].
we discuss abrupt specific capability scaling, in which models can also suddenly gain specific capabilities at scale. We
illustrate this phenomenon with three examples from the literature [4, 11, 62]. In Section 2.3, we argue that entire areas
of model competency may be unknown until they are solicited from specific inputs, problem domains, or applications.
In Section 2.4, we discuss challenges that arise from the open-endedness of model outputs and show both qualitative
and quantitative examples of harmful and toxic outputs emerging with scale.
In Section 3, we outline why, despite these conflicting properties of predictability and unpredictability, we expect
increasing development and deployment of large generative models despite the challenges we outline in Section 2. We
posit that this is due to a confluence of economic, scientific, and prestige motivations, each of which we summarize. We
also consider a few possible barriers to entry that model developers may face during development and deployment,
including high financial costs, access to engineering talent, safety concerns, and a lack of standards on how to responsibly
deploy capable generative models. We also provide some empirical observations (grounded in the motivations and
challenges described above) about how the development of large language models has unfolded thus far, including a
quantitative analysis of the increasing gap between academia and industry for large model development.
Finally, in Section 4 we outline policy interventions that may help concretely address the challenges we outline in
Sections 2 and 3 in order to help guide the development and deployment of larger models for the broader social good.
We leave some illustrative experiments, technical details, and caveats about our claims in Appendix A.
2 DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF LARGE GENERATIVE MODELS
We claim that large generative models (e.g., GPT-3 [ 11], LaMDA [78], Gopher [62], etc.) are distinguished by four
features:
• Smooth, general capability scaling: It is possible topredictably improve the general performance of generative
models — their loss on capturing a specific, though very broad, data distribution — by scaling up the size of the
models, the compute used to train them, and the amount of data they’re trained on in the correct proportions.
These proportions can be accurately predicted by scaling laws (Figure 1). We believe that these scaling laws
de-risk investments in building larger and generally more capable models despite the high resource costs and the
difficulty of predicting precisely how well a model will perform on a specific task. Note, the harmful properties
of models, such as toxicity, can scale alongside directly helpful capabilities.
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
• Abrupt, specific capability scaling: Though performance is predictable at a general level, performance on a
specific task can sometimes emerge quite unpredictably and abruptly at scale.4 While counter-intuitive, this is
possible because any specific task is a tiny slice of a model’s output probability distribution, and so can change
rapidly even as the full distribution remains smooth.
• Open-ended inputs and domains : Large generative models are open-ended and can take in a varying range
of inputs concerning arbitrary domains. As a result, certain capabilities (or even entire areas of competency) may
be unknown until an input happens to be provided that solicits such knowledge. Even after a model is trained,
creators and users may not be aware of most of its (possibly harmful) capabilities. These properties become more
pronounced as the models scale — larger models tend to be harder to characterize than smaller ones.
• Open-ended outputs: Finally, model outputs are also open-ended in the sense that they are difficult to predict
or control, even given a fixed scale, input, topic, or task. These outputs may be helpful or harmful, but it’s difficult
to know in advance. Of course, models with both open-ended inputs and outputs have existed for decades, but
what is new is the level of capability and breadth of open-endedness.
In the following sections, we further describe each of these distinguishing features, and discuss how combinations of
them may lead to disruptive societal impacts. We support our claims with data and experiments.
2.1 Smooth General Capability Scaling
Generally, machine learning experiments are not precisely predictable — complex models trained on complex data
typically yield noisy or variable results [18, 90].5 Though individual experiments may be unpredictable, the general
performance of large generative models tends to exhibit smooth and predictable growth as a function of scale — larger
systems tend to do increasingly better on a broad range of tasks. This was first noticed by [ 39] who observed that
capabilities such as machine translation and speech recognition increased in a smooth, predictable manner as the
size of the model increased. Subsequent work formalized and experimentally validated a quantitative relationship
between scale (in terms of both model size and training data size) and model generalization error [66]. Furthermore,
[43] demonstrated that test loss performance on language modeling tasks scales as a predictable function of model size,
dataset size, and duration of training. These three factors are like ingredients in a chemical reaction, such that if all
are scaled up in tandem, the test loss improves proportionally. However, if there is too little of one ingredient, gains
are limited by this ingredient. The trends are remarkably consistent, with only tiny deviations from a simple fit to the
data6, covering dozens of data points and several orders of magnitude (Figure 1).7 Subsequent work has shown that
similar scaling laws exist in generative models for other modalities (e.g., images, video, math, etc.) [37], audition [23],
transfer from text to programming [38], few-shot adaptation of vision models [60], and more.
Predictable scaling, and especially the underlying dependency on precise mixtures of data, model size, and training,
has implications for the process of model development. It shifts development of this type of model from a process of
artisanal trial-and-error to more of a predictable engineering process, where the resources needed to achieve a particular
result can be precisely calculated, and the cost of those resources can be compared to the utility of the result. Although
very specific behaviors may not be predictable (more on this in Section 2.2), the general test loss tends to correlate well
4Similar behavior has also been observed during the training process of an individual model (rather than as a function of model size) for algorithmic
tasks, and has been termed “grokking” [58].
5For example, [18] documents a strong lack of run-to-run reproducibility in reinforcement learning on Atari games when only changing the initial
random seed. This suggests that differences between algorithms may be difficult to measure rigorously due to such intrinsic noise.
6More precisely, the relationship is a straight line on a log-log plot, equivalent to a power law.
7Scaling naturally has a fundamental limit: the entropy of the training and test data sets. However, it’s both difficult to precisely estimate this quantity
a-priori and perhaps likely that there are important model capabilities that may emerge while pursuing this limit asymptotically.
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
107 108 109 1010 1011
Number of Parameters
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5% Samples Solving T ask
Program Synthesis
108 109 1010 1011
Number of Parameters
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8Accuracy
3 Digit Addition
GPT-3
Gopher
Google LM
109 1010 1011
Number of Parameters
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Accuracy
Massive Multitask Language Understanding
Fig. 2 Three examples of abrupt specific capability scaling described in Section 2.2, based on three different models: GPT-3 (blue),
Gopher (orange), and a Google language model (green). (Left) 3-Digit addition with GPT-3 [11]. (Middle) Language understanding
with GPT-3 and Gopher [62]. (Right) Program synthesis with Google language models [4].
on average with many tasks, meaning that larger models typically make significant gains across the board. In this sense,
scaling laws de-risk investments in large models . We say more on this in Section 3.1 and provide more technical
details on how developers may use scaling laws in Appendix A.2. To further illustrate how smooth general scaling
correlates with task performance, and how a scale-based analysis can be used to forecast the potential economic value
of a given model, we outline a small original experiment in Appendix A.3 that analyzes the relationship between scale
and GPT-3 like language models [3] to be used as recommendation systems with zero-shot learning. We chose this
example because recommendation systems have tangible economic relevance, known societal impact, are well studied
in machine learning with domain specific algorithms [33], but are not typically studied with large scale generative
models (yet). Surprisingly, we find that that generative models can increasingly operate as simple recommendation
systems as they scale with minimal effort and extremely limited access to explicit training data. We leave a detailed
analysis and discussion in Appendix A.3.
2.2 Abrupt Specific Capability Scaling
Though performance on a wide distribution of tasks may scale smoothly with model size, qualitatively different, specific
capabilities can appear abruptly and discontinuously. It is not clear when or why this happens. But intuitively, abrupt
scaling of a specific capability can co-exist with smooth general scaling for the same reason that daily weather is less
predictable than seasonal averages: individual data points can vary much more than broad averages.
Here, we illustrate three examples of abrupt capability scaling for arithmetic [11], language understanding, [34, 62],
and programming [4] (Figure 2). For arithmetic, GPT-3 displays a sharp capability transition somewhere between 6B
parameters and 175B parameters, depending on the operation and the number of digits [11]. For example, three digit
addition is performed accurately less than 1% of the time on any model with less than 6B parameters, but this jumps to
8% accuracy on a 13B parameter model and 80% accuracy on a 175B parameter model – producing a “hockey stick”-style
graph (Figure 2, Left) in which arithmetic ability appears suddenly after several orders of magnitude of nothing.
A different language model, DeepMind’s Gopher [62], also displays an abrupt jump in performance on a different
dataset, the MMLU language understanding benchmark [ 34] (Figure 2, Middle, orange). For all models under 6B
parameters, Gopher performs under 30% accuracy, which is a little better than chance (25% accuracy). However, the full
280B parameter Gopher model achieves 60% accuracy, a significant jump. GPT-3 displays a similar phenomenon though
of smaller magnitude (Figure 2, Middle, blue).
As a third example, a recently developed class of program synthesis models from Google display dramatic improve-
ments in their ability to create computer programs as they increase in size from 10B to 100B parameters [4] (Figure 2,
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
Right). For example, the percentage of generated synthetic programs that solve a given programming problem jumps
substantially from 6% to 13% when the model size increases by ∼ 2x from 68B to 138B parameters, despite very small
increases over the previous two orders of magnitude.
Abrupt specific capability scaling presents significant challenges for safety assurance and deployment of large models.
Although we’ve demonstrated this phenomenon for relatively anodyne capabilities, potentially harmful ones may
emerge at scale (that will not exist in smaller models) and may be difficult to anticipate.
2.3 Open-Ended Inputs and Domains
Large generative models are open-ended — they take in arbitrary inputs from a variety of domains and generate
(often relevant and creative) outputs. As a result, some model behaviors may be unknown until they are solicited from
specific inputs. Pre-trained generative models can also be fine-tuned on new data in order to solve new problems.
Broadly enabling such fine-tuning substantially increases the breadth of model capabilities and associated difficulties in
predicting or constraining model behaviors. This open-endedness is challenging because it means AI developers may
deploy their systems without fully knowing potentially unexpected (and possibly harmful) behaviors in response to
un-tested inputs.
For example, the AI Dungeon video game fine-tuned GPT-3 for fantasy role-playing [76], but with the right inputs,
players were able to manipulate it to discuss any topic, essentially providing general backdoor access to GPT-3 [55].
Thus, a model use-case that appeared to be designed just for one purpose, actually carried the full range of GPT-3
capabilities, accessible through skillful use of its open-ended interface.
To further illustrate our point about the inherent challenges of open-ended inputs and domains, and tie it to the
possibility of harm from language models, we consider a problem domain that language models are typically not (or
not yet) deployed on, but which is associated with societal concerns: recidivism prediction. Some have pointed out that
even beyond specific concerns about fairness, recidivism prediction simply should not be a task for machine learning
[6]. We agree and we do not believe that language models should be used for recidivism prediction. However, because
the application is so inherently questionable, it provides a compelling example of how harmful abilities can emerge
quietly in unexpected ways as generative models scale. It is likely that such abrupt emergence also occurs in many
other contexts where the harms are more subtle. We study a case where the problems are flagrant in order to clearly
demonstrate our thesis.
To do this, we leverage the ProPublica COMPAS dataset, which includes data about more than 7, 000 defendants
arrested in Broward County Florida [2, 6]. The dataset includes a recidivism risk score, computed by the COMPAS
algorithm (which is meant to reflect the risk of a defendant committing a misdemeanor or felony within 2 years of
assessment based on a set of features about the defendant, not including race 8), along with the actual outcome of
whether each defendant re-offended. ProPublica found that these risk scores are inaccurate and racially biased [ 2].
Further research found that human subjects with limited to no criminal justice experience exhibit similar inaccuracies
and racial biases as COMPAS when predicting recidivism based on a simple prompt describing a defendant [22]. The
human subject experiment examined two conditions, one in which a defendant’s race was excluded from the prompt,
and one in which it was included.9 Here, we use the same prompts outlined in [22] but instead ask language models
[3] instead of people to predict recidivism. We leave full technical details and (significant) caveats in Appendix A.4;
8More precisely, the COMPAS algorithm makes its predictions from 137 features about a defendant and the defendant’s past criminal record. COMPAS
does not consider the defendant’s race; however, other features it does consider may be correlated with race and thus lead to racially disparate predictions.
9Interestingly, the researchers found that the exclusion of race had no significant impact on human recidivism prediction accuracy or fairness [22].
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
107
108
109
1010
Number of Parameters
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65Accuracy
COMPAS
Chance
Recidivism Predicton
LM, race excluded
LM, race included
107
108
109
1010
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25False Positive Rate Ratio
COMPAS
Fair
Black to white False Positive Rate Ratio
Fig. 3 Large language models, with few-shot learning, exhibit similar (or worse) inaccuracies and racial biases as COMPAS for
recidivism prediction when prompted with the same prompts from a human recidivism prediction experiment [22]. This illustrates
our claim in Section 2.3 that it may be difficult to anticipate possible harms of large generative models due to the open-ended nature
of their inputs and domains. (Left) Accuracy increases with model size, approaching COMPAS performance. We see no significant
difference in predictive accuracy when race is excluded from the prompt (blue) or included in the prompt (orange). (Right) Language
models become increasingly biased towards predicting Black, compared to white, people will re-offend (when in reality they do
not) similarly to COMPAS. We find a higher false positive rate ratio when race is included in the prompt (orange) versus when it is
excluded (blue). See Appendix A.4 for technical details and caveats.
however, we foreground here that benchmark risk assessment instrument datasets like COMPAS often contain numerous
measurement biases and errors which can make them ill-suited for making claims about real-world impact without
carefully considering the the complicated socio-technical systems (in this case, the US criminal justice system) in which
they are used [6].
We found that language models exhibit similar (or worse) inaccuracies and racial biases as COMPAS. Figure 3 shows
language models of increasing size compared to COMPAS in terms of two metrics mentioned in the ProPublica analysis
[2] and the subsequent human subject experiment [ 22]: overall predictive accuracy, and the ratio in false positive
rates for Black versus white defendants. We show results for both prompts that exclude an individual’s race (blue)
and include it (orange). For overall predictive accuracy, language models become increasingly accurate at predicting
whether defendants will re-offend (Figure 3, Left) as they increase in size, yet they are still unreliable predictors like
COMPAS. We see no significant difference in predictive accuracy when race is excluded from the prompt or included. In
both conditions, the largest model, with 52B parameters, achieves 63% accuracy compared to COMPAS’s66% accuracy.
We also see higher ratios in false positive rates for Black versus white defendants (Figure 3, Right), which partially
recapitulates the racial biases of the COMPAS algorithm outlined described in [2]. For COMPAS, this ratio is1.92, which
indicates that Black defendants are predicted to re-offend nearly twice as often as white defendants, when in reality
they did not (a fair algorithm would have a false positive rate ratio of 1). As language models increase in size, at around
12B parameters, the false positive rate ratio increases smoothly and reaches a value of 1.5 for the largest model when
race is excluded in the prompt and a value of 2.21 when race is included in the prompt. In the latter case, the largest
language model is even less equitable than COMPAS.10 Likely, the model is picking up on a combination of the racial
bias in the small fraction of the COMPAS dataset it sees, and ambient racial bias in the pre-trained language models.
To emphasize again what was stated earlier, the point here is not only the emergence of racial biases in the recidivism
prediction task, but also the emergence of the ability to perform this task at all. As the language model scales, it acquires
both the ability to do a task that many have argued is inherently harmful [ 6], and it performs this task in a biased
10Although the false positive rate ratio of the largest language model where race is included in the prompt is 2.21 vs. 1.92 for COMPAS, in absolute terms
the false positive rates for the language model (30% for Black, 12.6% for white) are lower than the false positive rates for COMPAS (45% for Black, 24% for
white)
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
Fig. 4 A conversation with an AI Assistant [ 3] powered by a 52B parameter language model that illustrates challenges with
Open-endedness outlined in Section 2.4
manner. It is likely that large language models have many other (currently undiscovered) "skills" that pose one or both
of these problems, perhaps in less obvious forms.
In summary, pre-trained language models can be adapted with minimal effort for purposes not anticipated by their
creators, whether that’s by using the inherent capabilities of the model to evade a security constraint (as in the AI
Dungeon example), or by discovering new capabilities through novel inputs (as in the discussion of abrupt capability
jumps in Section 2.2, and the recidivism experiment above). We also note that many of the most surprising capabilities
manifest at large-scale, so working with smaller models will make it harder to explore such capabilities.
2.4 Open-Ended Outputs
In the previous section we argued that language models have open-ended inputs, which creates the opportunity for
unexpected and undetected capabilities to emerge. But even when the input or topic is fixed, the resulting output can be
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
107
108
109
1010
Number of Parameters
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06Effect Size
Toxicity
Fig. 5 The toxicity of model outputs increases smoothly with model size, which illustrates how though loss may reduce generally
when scaling a model, other societally impactful potential harms of the model may also scale, as described in Section 2.4.
varied and unpredictable. This kind of unpredictability is arguably more familiar and widely studied than the previous
kind, but is worth briefly discussing as it adds an additional layer of complexity to large model behavior.
As an example, in Figure 4 we ask an AI assistant [3] to tell us something offensive, for the purpose of illustrating our
claim. Despite prompting the model with a relatively clear input, the model has generated an output that is tangential
to the question at hand: the response isn’t directly offensive, but is instead a list of offenses made by other AI systems.
One effect of this open-endedness is that unpredictable model responses can be a distraction away from a person’s
original query.
Open-endedness also introduces a second and more harmful risk of factual inaccuracy. Taking a closer look at the
exchange in Figure 4, we can see that the model has made up these offenses - systems like IBM Watson and Microsoft’s
Tay [86] did have problems during their deployment, but the AI assistant gets the year and error wrong in the case
of Watson, and the error wrong (but year right) in the case of Tay. When we ask the model if it is sure the examples
are correct, the model gives misleading answers and questions the authority of the human asking it questions. This
illustrates how even with a specific input (e.g, requesting the model say something offensive), AI models can give
outputs that are not only distracting, but potentially misleading.
Open-ended model outputs can also introduce harmful or undesirable text. For example, Figure 5 shows that the
toxicity (defined as rude, disrespectful, or unreasonable language [29])11 of text generated from language models [3]
increases smoothly and significantly with model size. A recent study has observed a very similar toxicity trend with
model size using similar models with different analyses [62], which suggests that this may be a general phenomenon.
We leave further details and caveats in Appendix A.6.
Many applications for language models, including chat bots, search engines, text summarization systems, question
answer systems, machine translation systems, etc., rely on open-ended text generation. As such, we argue that it is
important to quantify how societally relevant aspects of open-ended text generation — relevancy, accuracy, safety, and
even creative expression (see Appendix A.5 for a discussion on AI generated poetry) — scale with model size. It will
also be important to develop techniques that can improve the factual accuracy of the results of AI models, as described
in e.g., [10], and to make the outputs of models more appropriate and less likely to display harmful biases [73].
3 MOTIVATIONS AND PROBLEMS IN THE DEVELOPMENT AND DEPLOYMENT OF LARGE MODELS
In the previous section we described our basic thesis that large generative models have a paradoxical combination of four
distinguishing features: predictable general performance, and unpredictable specific capabilities, inputs, and outputs.
11https://github.com/conversationai/perspectiveapi
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
Predictable general performance, combined with impressive outputs (e.g, specific capabilities) drives rapid development
of such models, while the unpredictability makes it difficult for model developers to anticipate the consequences of
model deployment. There are numerous motivations (and barriers) for developing and deploying large generative
models due to (or in spite of) these distinguishing features. Here, we focus on elements of this fundamental tension and
ground our discussion with some empirical observations.
More specifically, in Section 3.1 we outline three salient motivations for developing and deploying large generative
models: economic, scientific, and prestige. Conversely, in Section 3.2 we outline three barriers to entry : the financial
costs and engineering talents required in order to scale models, AI safety issues, and the lack of standards and norms in
model deployment. These motivations and barriers are non-exhaustive and perhaps obvious. Nevertheless, we think
that they are worth explicitly stating in order for us to illustrate, in in Section 3.3, how combinations of these factors
may explain some empirical observations on how the development and deployment of language models has occurred
thus far. In particular, we note that large language models are rapidly proliferating, that there is a rising gap between
industry and academia for developing such models, and that there have been numerous documented examples of model
deployments causing harm and controversy.
3.1 Motivations for Developing and Deploying Large Models
Economic. Perhaps the simplest and most obvious motivation for model development is economic. Scaling laws mean
that the cost to develop a model can be precisely estimated, and when an economically valuable output can be found to
scale smoothly with the loss, then the returns to training a model can also be calculated. This applies both generally
and specifically — some institutions may wish to broadly improve the capabilities of a given model and will thus have
an economic incentive to build them, while others may be targeting a specific model capability which is accompanied
by a scaling law, and will therefore also have an incentive to build them. This has the effect ofde-risking the training
of large models: a predictable amount can be invested for a relatively predictable return, unlike many speculative
research projects where an open-ended amount must be invested for an uncertain return. Predictability makes the logic
of research investment more obvious and may help to justify it within large institutions (see Appendix A.2 for more
examples). Thus, economic motivations, combined with continued smooth, general capability scaling, suggest that
we should expect to see increasing model deployments. While it may not be possible to predict in advance precisely
which search queries will benefit from a particular AI model and which won’t, or which applications will flourish and
which will unpredictably fail, or which development workflows will be helped by code synthesis models, all of these
applications take advantage of broad averages to tie economic returns to the smooth general capability scaling.
Scientific. Large generative models may be a necessary basis for broad swaths of novel interdisciplinary AI research
on topics ranging from linguistics and robotics to philosophy and the social sciences [9]. Without the development
of (or at least access to) large models, it will be challenging to research how they may advance progress in societally
impactful research domains such as healthcare, education, and law [9]. Large models are also fertile testing grounds for
developing next-generation algorithms and architectures — novel algorithms can be rigorously evaluated according to
whether they advantageously shift scaling laws to be more compute, data, or parameter efficient.
Prestige. The fact these models are on the frontier of possibility also creates a prestige incentive for developing them.
Large models can be an advertisement for the capabilities of an institution – a way to gain a perceived advantage in the
public eye, to make it easier to recruit (coveted) skilled AI researchers, to increase sales of services unrelated to large
models, or to support national initiatives or national pride.
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
All of these motivations have the potential to create an unusual situation where there are strong incentives to develop,
disclose, and even deploy large generative models despite high uncertainty about the full extent of what these models
are capable of.
3.2 Barriers to Entry in Developing and Deploying Large Models
Financial Costs and Engineering Talent. Scaling up large generative models requires a significant financial investment.
For example, GPT-3 was estimated to cost several million dollars to train [50]. Scaling up large generative models also
requires specific engineering competencies, e.g., distributed systems engineering, familiarity with cluster management
tools like Kubernetes, low-level GPU programming, managing continuous integration testing, etc. The size of these
models has led to longer development timelines and more complex workflows than previous systems over the past
decade. For example, only ∼ 10 years ago, one of the larger scale AI models at the time, AlexNet12 [48], was trained by
a graduate student for a few thousand of dollars on a single desktop machine with 2 GPUs.
Safety and Bias. As described in Section 2, open-endedness combined with smooth, general capability scaling and the
abrupt scaling of specific capabilities, is likely to lead to safety issues [ 9, 83] that are found after a model has been
developed and deployed. Additionally, these models also possess known (pre-deployment) safety issues for which we
lack robust solutions [35] (e.g, How do you ensure the system does not generate inappropriate and harmful outputs, such
as making overtly sexist or racist comments [73]? How do you identify bias issues in the system prior to deployment
[8, 59]? How do you ensure that when the model outputs a claim, it isn’t making up facts [10]?, etc.).
Lack of Standards and Norms. Because these large generative models have been developed very recently (within the last
five years), and have only recently become valuable to deploy from an economic perspective, no standards for the safe
deployment of these systems exist. This lack of standards compounds the problems caused by the four distinguishing
features of generative models we identify in Section 2, as well as the safety issues discussed above. At the same time,
there’s a growing field of research oriented around identifying the weaknesses of these models, as well as potential
problems with their associated development and deployment practices [7, 9, 21, 44, 56, 69, 74, 75, 83]. However, this
research is not yet embodied in the form of repeatable standards that developers can adopt, though there are some
critical and important steps in this direction (e.g., through the use of model cards [53] and data sheets [28] to document
the capabilities, drawbacks, and other salient details of models). This lack of standards makes it both more challenging to
deploy systems, as developers may need to determine their own policies for deployment, and it also makes deployments
inherently risky, as there’s less shared knowledge about what ’safe’ deployments look like. We are, in a sense, building
the plane as it is taking off.
3.3 Empirical Observations
The above sections described some motivations and challenges that we expect AI developers to face with respect to
large models. In this section we assess how those issues may explain three inter-related empirical observations: (1) large
language models are rapidly proliferating (2) industry has become responsible for a larger share of resource-intensive
model development compared to academia, and (3) large model deployment has already caused harm and controversy.
12Though not a generative model, AlexNet was, at the time, a frontier model in terms of computational consumption, hence why we include it as a
comparison.
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
May 2020 Jul 2020 Sep 2020 Nov 2020 Jan 2021 Mar 2021 May 2021 Jul 2021 Sep 2021 Nov 2021 Jan 2022
GPT-3 (175B)
Pan-Gu (200B)
HyperCLOVA (204B)
Jurassic-1 Jumbo (178B)
FLAN (137B)
Yuan 1.0 (246B)
Megatron Turing-NLG (530B)
Gopher (280B)
Ernie 3.0 Titan (260B)
LaMDA (137B)
Country
USA
China
South Korea
Israel
UK/USA
Fig. 6 Timeline of public disclosures of GPT-3 scale dense language models.
Large Language Models Are Rapidly Proliferating. Figure 6 shows a timeline of public disclosures of GPT-3 scale (100B -
530B) dense language models, since GPT-3.13 About one year after GPT-3 was announced, a spike in similar model
announcements followed. These models were developed by both large and small private organizations from around the
world: Jurassic-1-Jumbo [51], AI21 Labs, Israel; Ernie 3.0 Titan [81], Baidu, China; Gopher [62], DeepMind, USA/UK;
FLAN [82] & LaMDA [78], Google, USA; Pan Gu [89] Huawei, China; Yuan 1.0 [87], Inspur, China; Megatron Turing
NLG [72], Microsoft & NVIDIA, USA; and HyperClova [46], Naver, Korea. This suggests that the economic incentives
to build such models, and the prestige incentives to announce them, are quite strong.
Rising Gap Between Industry and Academia. At the time of writing, the largest language models that are free and publicly
available are BigScience T0 (11B) [68], and Eleuther AI’s GPT-J (6B) [80] and GPT-NeoX (20B) [49], which are one to
two orders of magnitude smaller than those developed by industry. Although academics can easily access (at least
some of) the larger models, it is typically only possible to do so through a (potentially expensive) company-controlled
API. This is part of a broader and longer-running trend towards high-compute research migrating from academia to
industry that can be quantified (See Appendix A.7 for details ). Figure 7 (Left) shows that in recent years the compute
required for large-scale AI experiments has increased by more than 300, 000X relative to a decade ago.14 Along with
this rise in resource intensity, we see a corresponding (and sharp) fall in the proportion of these results that come from
academia (Figure 7, Right). This suggests that, although academics may be strongly motivated by scientific curiosity,
and well-poised to research safety issues, they may be significantly challenged by the high financial and engineering
costs.
Harm and Controversy. There have been numerous examples of harm caused by the deployment of large generative
models. For example, the AI system Tay was deployed before it was properly scrutinized, and generated hateful language
[86]. It has also been shown that language models can memorize training data (which in turn can include privately
identifiable information) [14, 57] and aid in disinformation campaigns [13]. Furthermore, people critical of organizations
deploying such models have been directly harmed for voicing their concerns, sometimes to much controversy [71].
Legislators are actively grappling with these issues. For example, the European Commission’s proposed AI legislation
seeks to create standards for how ‘high risk’ AI systems are deployed and monitored.15 This suggests that standards
and norms for responsible model development and deployment are both significantly needed and lacking.
13The timeline does not include sparse or mixture of experts models (e.g., GLaM [24]), which often achieve comparable performance with similar or
slightly lower compute, but are difficult to characterize in terms of a single model size. It also does not include models trained on different modalities,
such as code [4, 16], or multi-modal models such as [61].
14Some people have noted that this trend may not be sustainable [52]
15https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-approach-artificial-intelligence
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Year
102
106
1010
1014
1018
1022
1026
Compute (FLOPs)
AI Compute: Industry vs Academia
Industry
Academia
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Year
0
20
40
60
80
100Percentage
% of Large Scale AI results from Academia
Fig. 7 (Left) The amount of compute required by major AI projects over time is increasing exponentially for both academic (blue)
and industrial (orange) projects. (Right) The proportion of computationally-intensive AI results from academia is steadily decreasing.
(The blue curve represents a Lowess fit to the data.)
4 INTERVENTIONS TO ENCOURAGE BENEFICIAL DEPLOYMENTS
Based on the distinguishing features of large generative models that we outline in Section 2, and the various motivations
for model development and deployment that we discuss in Section 3, we believe that large generative models will
increasingly be developed and deployed despite their potential for harm. Here, we outline possible technical and policy
interventions (along with corresponding implementation paths) that can increase the chance of these models being
developed and deployed in positive ways. For each intervention, we refer to the literature concerning related efforts.
Furthermore, we provide a concrete implementation path for each intervention along with possible caveats.
Reduce compute asymmetries between the private sector and academia. As shown in section 3.3, private sector orga-
nizations are the primary developers and deployers of large generative models. This means that other actors, such
as academic and government ones, are less well-placed to understand the distinguishing technical features of these
models, and are therefore less equipped to research the problems inherent to them. As outlined in Section 3.2, the
main constraints here are the financial and engineering resources for model training - therefore, we should create
experimental infrastructure16 to make it easier for a larger scientific community to analyze these models. To support
and effectively utilize such infrastructure, academic and government organizations will also need to find ways to make
the necessary financial and structural investments to be able to hire and retain technical talent that may otherwise
go to industry. This is important because academic and public sector motivations may stem more from the pursuit of
knowledge rather than profit, and can draw on more varied expertise than the private sector for analyzing and exploring
large generative models.17 Although large models are resource-intensive, they are actually much less expensive than
academic ‘Big Science’ projects in some other fields. For instance, the Large Hadron Collider cost $5 billion to build
[47], the International Thermonuclear Experiment Reactor is projected to cost between $ 10 and $15 billion18, the
Square Kilometre Array is projected to cost around $1 billion [15], and the Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility and Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment are anticipated to cost $2.4 billion [77]. By comparison, training frontier generative
16We do not distinguish between public or private (cloud) infrastructure. Some have raised concerns regarding how specific choices here may centralize
power in different ways [42]. Governments will need to examine how usable these different infrastructures are, and the long-term ramifications of
empowering particular infrastructure providers.
17It is worth noting that by increasing the amount of actors with access to non-trivial compute, it’s possible to increase some risks with regard to safe
development and deployment of models, especially those that stem from a need to coordinate among different developers. However, this risk likely
does not add significantly to the existing risk landscape, given that economic incentives for model development are leading to a proliferation of model
developers in industry — academics have much less of an incentive to commercially deploy their models. On balance, therefore, it seems helpful to give
academia more resources to help it serve as a counter-weight to industry.
18https://www.iter.org/FAQ
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
models like GPT-3 and others costs on the order of a million to ten million dollars, so the infrastructure to develop
models substantially larger than the current frontier would have precedent in academia.
Implementation Path: Countries may wish to develop and deploy so-called ‘National Research Clouds’ that
facilitate access to a heavily subsidized and/or free compute resource for academic researchers. An existing example
here includes Compute Canada19. There are also future initiatives being considered, such as the infrastructure being
analyzed by the US government’s National AI Research Resource task force20, and the ‘Big Science’ project which is
leveraging a supercomputer (partially subsidized by the French government) to train large generative models. Recent
work from Stanford also explores this implementation path in more detail [40].
Improve knowledge about how to ‘red team’ models. As some of the challenges from these models stem from their
open-ended nature (perhaps compounded by smooth and abrupt capability scaling) we should develop ways to more
effectively explore the input and output space of their models, so as to discover harms prior to deployment. We can
model this on the ‘red team’ approach which is popular in the computer security industry and can be applied in an AI
context [5, 12]. This should take the form of both static benchmarks (for example, adversarial datasets to probe for
weaknesses in computer vision systems [36]), as well as continuous evaluation by humans carrying out multi-step
interactions (e.g, conversations [3, 88]) with these models, as well as plans for how to update the models in response to
what these evaluations find.
Implementation Path: Model developers should invest in internal red teaming approaches for their models and
seek to publish on the techniques, datasets, and policy choices they make when red teaming. This will facilitate more
shared awareness about how to red team models. There may also be a commercial market that can be developed for ‘red
teaming as a service’, though more community research into the area may be a prerequisite for this. AI developers may
also wish to create ‘bug bounty’ initiatives, where they give out prizes to people who can demonstrate repeatable ways
of breaking a given AI system [45]. Finally, we should consider how to augment (or complement) manual red-teaming
with automated methods [57].
Explore and prototype novel governance structures and government interventions. If the capabilities and resource-
intensiveness of models scale further, then it may be prudent to explore governance structures that alter the incentives
of private sector actors with regard to development and deployment. To do this, there will be a combination of soft
regulation (e.g, the creation of voluntary best practices by industry, academia, civil society, and government), and
hard regulation (e.g, transferring these best practices into standards and legislation). Governments should also explore
regulatory approaches that can increase the chance of actors developing and deploying beneficial systems.
Implementation Path: AI development organizations should experiment with novel governance and oversight
structures that let a broader set of stakeholders factor into model deployment decisions. This could take the form of
oversight functions which can critique and publicly censure organizations should the organization diverge from the
recommendations of the oversight body, to novel forms of governance that give diverse stakeholders power over an
organization (for example, a private company could elect board members who represent the interests of civil society
and/or academia rather than a pure profit-driven motive). AI development organizations should also work among
themselves to develop best practices for the development and deployment of AI systems, then seek to get feedback on
these from a broader range of stakeholders, potentially via the creation of third-party organizations for the purposes of
19https://www.computecanada.ca/home/
20https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/06/10/the-biden-administration-launches-the-national-artificial-intelligence-research-
resource-task-force/
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
standard formation. Along with innovations in governance of AI organizations, and work on best practices, we also
believe governments should invest in better methods to assure the benefits of systems being deployed - specifically,
governments should support efforts to measure and monitor the capabilities (both harmful and beneficial) of deployed AI
systems [85], and should support the creation of an ecosystem oriented around auditing AI models and AI development
processes [54, 64, 65].
Improve the tools available for model evaluation. Given the open-ended nature and scale of these models, researchers
would benefit from having more tools available to help them comprehensively and efficiently evaluate these models. If
we can find ways to create more open source tools and frameworks in this area, then we can benefit the broader model
development ecosystem. Particularly valuable would be tools for doing a very broad set of evaluations, or evaluations
that search (e.g. across prompts) for new capabilities, rather than just fixed evaluation datasets that measure known
capabilities.
Implementation Path: Research funding organizations should allocate funds to researchers that are building
evaluation systems (e.g, software, tests, and benchmarks) and critiquing them (e.g., see [20, 63]). Private sector and
independent research organizations should invest further into developing tools to help researchers understand and
evaluate large generative models - existing examples include Eleuther’s ‘Language Model Evaluation Harness’ [27], the
BIG-bench benchmark21, HuggingFace’s ‘BERTology’ tooling22, and more.
Improve our understanding of abrupt jumps in capabilities. In Section 2.2 we gave a few examples of abrupt jumps in
capabilities (abrupt capability scaling). Anecdotally, our experience has been that abrupt jumps occur in only a minority
of tasks, but at the same time are not especially rare. How often do they occur, is there a pattern to the kind of tasks on
which they occur, why do they occur, and are there any leading indicators that predict when they are about to occur?
Answering these questions could help to address some of the most surprising behavior in large models, and might be
especially important for future AI safety issues.
Implementation Path: A systematic empirical study of abrupt jumps, across research and possibly commercial
tasks for large models, could help to shed light on how common they are and when they occur. One route to studying
this could be through interpretability research (e.g., [ 17]), and specifically a new approach known as mechanistic
interpretability [25] - attempting to reverse engineer the computations performed by transformers (which underpin
many of the generative models discussed in this paper) gives researchers a way to better understand how models
behave.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have articulated (and provided evidence for) our basic thesis that large generative models have a
paradoxical combination of high predictability - model capabilities scale in relation to resources expended on training
- and high unpredictability - before training a model, it’s difficult to anticipate all the inputs it will be subjected to,
and what capabilities and outputs it will have. The former drives rapid development of such models while the latter
makes it difficult to anticipate the consequences of their development and deployment. We’ve also described how these
traits combine to alter the landscape of AI development, making it more likely a greater number of actors will build
these models. Put bluntly: the status quo outlined here suggests that the next few years will see a proliferation of
actors building ever-larger models, and these actors will have strong motivations to deploy these models, despite their
21https://github.com/google/BIG-bench
22https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/bertology
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
potential for (possibly unpredictable) harmful societal impact. Various interventions (including the ones we outline in
our paper) can change this dynamic, but it is nevertheless the current situation we must start from and continue to
improve.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sam Bowman, Miles Brundage, Timnit Gebru, Gillian Hadfield, Percy Liang, Luke Muehlhauser, Helen Ngo,
Michael Sellitto, Alex Tamkin, Helen Toner, and Sharon Zhou, and the anonymous reviewers for detailed feedback on
drafts of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Neel Alex, Eli Lifland, Lewis Tunstall, Abhishek Thakur, Pegah Maham, C. Jess Riedel, Emmie Hine, Carolyn Ashurst, Paul Sedille, Alexis Carlier,
Michael Noetel, and Andreas Stuhlmüller. 2021. RAFT: A Real-World Few-Shot Text Classification Benchmark. arXiv:2109.14076 [cs] (Nov. 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14076 arXiv: 2109.14076.
[2] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine bias: There’s software used across the country to predict future
criminals. and it’s biased against blacks. https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
[3] Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma,
Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark,
Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. 2021. A General Language Assistant as a Laboratory for Alignment. arXiv:2112.00861 [cs] (Dec.
2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00861 arXiv: 2112.00861.
[4] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
and Charles Sutton. 2021. Program Synthesis with Large Language Models. arXiv:2108.07732 [cs] (Aug. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732 arXiv:
2108.07732.
[5] Shahar Avin, Haydn Belfield, Miles Brundage, Gretchen Krueger, Jasmine Wang, Adrian Weller, Markus Anderljung, Igor Krawczuk, David
Krueger, Jonathan Lebensold, Tegan Maharaj, and Noa Zilberman. 2021. Filling gaps in trustworthy development of AI. Science (Dec. 2021).
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi7176 Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
[6] Michelle Bao, Angela Zhou, Samantha Zottola, Brian Brubach, Sarah Desmarais, Aaron Horowitz, Kristian Lum, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian.
2021. It’s COMPASlicated: The Messy Relationship between RAI Datasets and Algorithmic Fairness Benchmarks. arXiv:2106.05498 [cs] (June 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.05498 arXiv: 2106.05498.
[7] Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
Models Be Too Big?. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’21) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 610–623. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922
[8] Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (Technology) is Power: A Critical Survey of "Bias" in NLP.
arXiv:2005.14050 [cs] (May 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14050 arXiv: 2005.14050.
[9] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine
Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh,
Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth
Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir
Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts,
Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa,
Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang,
Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang,
Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. 2021. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. arXiv:2108.07258 [cs] (Aug.
2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258 arXiv: 2108.07258.
[10] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste
Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren
Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W.
Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. 2021. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. arXiv:2112.04426 [cs] (Dec. 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04426 arXiv: 2112.04426.
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
[11] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner,
Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 1877–1901.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
[12] Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jasmine Wang, Haydn Belfield, Gretchen Krueger, Gillian Hadfield, Heidy Khlaaf, Jingying Yang, Helen Toner, Ruth
Fong, Tegan Maharaj, Pang Wei Koh, Sara Hooker, Jade Leung, Andrew Trask, Emma Bluemke, Jonathan Lebensold, Cullen O’Keefe, Mark Koren,
Théo Ryffel, J. B. Rubinovitz, Tamay Besiroglu, Federica Carugati, Jack Clark, Peter Eckersley, Sarah de Haas, Maritza Johnson, Ben Laurie, Alex
Ingerman, Igor Krawczuk, Amanda Askell, Rosario Cammarota, Andrew Lohn, David Krueger, Charlotte Stix, Peter Henderson, Logan Graham,
Carina Prunkl, Bianca Martin, Elizabeth Seger, Noa Zilberman, Seán O hÉigeartaigh, Frens Kroeger, Girish Sastry, Rebecca Kagan, Adrian Weller,
Brian Tse, Elizabeth Barnes, Allan Dafoe, Paul Scharre, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Martijn Rasser, Shagun Sodhani, Carrick Flynn, Thomas Krendl Gilbert,
Lisa Dyer, Saif Khan, Yoshua Bengio, and Markus Anderljung. 2020. Toward Trustworthy AI Development: Mechanisms for Supporting Verifiable
Claims. arXiv:2004.07213 [cs] (April 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07213 arXiv: 2004.07213.
[13] Ben Buchanan, Andrew Lohn, Micha Musser, and Katerina Sedova. 2021. Truth, Lies, and Automation. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/truth-
lies-and-automation/
[14] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Katherine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song,
Ulfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin Raffel. 2021. Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models. arXiv:2012.07805 [cs] (June 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07805 arXiv: 2012.07805.
[15] Edwin Cartlidge. 2019. Square Kilometre Array hit with further cost hike and delay. Physics World (Aug. 2019). https://physicsworld.com/a/square-
kilometre-array-hit-with-further-cost-hike-and-delay/
[16] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray,
Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave
Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak,
Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant
Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei,
Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs] (July
2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374 arXiv: 2107.03374.
[17] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. What Does BERT Look At? An Analysis of BERT’s Attention.
arXiv:1906.04341 [cs] (June 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04341 arXiv: 1906.04341.
[18] Kaleigh Clary, Emma Tosch, John Foley, and David Jensen. 2019. Let’s Play Again: Variability of Deep Reinforcement Learning Agents in Atari
Environments. arXiv:1904.06312 [cs, stat] (April 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.06312 arXiv: 1904.06312.
[19] Kate Crawford. 2021. Atlas of AI. Yale University Press. https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300209570/atlas-ai
[20] Emily Denton, Alex Hanna, Razvan Amironesei, Andrew Smart, Hilary Nicole, and Morgan Klaus Scheuerman. 2020. Bringing the People Back In:
Contesting Benchmark Machine Learning Datasets. arXiv:2007.07399 [cs] (July 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.07399 arXiv: 2007.07399.
[21] Emily Dinan, Gavin Abercrombie, A. Stevie Bergman, Shannon Spruit, Dirk Hovy, Y.-Lan Boureau, and Verena Rieser. 2021. Anticipating Safety
Issues in E2E Conversational AI: Framework and Tooling. arXiv:2107.03451 [cs] (July 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03451 arXiv: 2107.03451.
[22] Julia Dressel and Hany Farid. 2018. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. Science Advances (Jan. 2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.aao5580 Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
[23] Jasha Droppo and Oguz Elibol. 2021. Scaling Laws for Acoustic Models. arXiv:2106.09488 [cs, eess] (June 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09488
arXiv: 2106.09488.
[24] Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan
Firat, Barret Zoph, Liam Fedus, Maarten Bosma, Zongwei Zhou, Tao Wang, Yu Emma Wang, Kellie Webster, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Kathy
Meier-Hellstern, Toju Duke, Lucas Dixon, Kun Zhang, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, and Claire Cui. 2021. GLaM: Efficient Scaling of
Language Models with Mixture-of-Experts. arXiv:2112.06905 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.06905 arXiv: 2112.06905.
[25] Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly,
Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse,
Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. 2021. A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits.
[26] Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2016. On the (im)possibility of fairness. arXiv:1609.07236 [cs, stat] (Sept.
2016). http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.07236 arXiv: 1609.07236.
[27] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas
Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. 2021. A framework for few-shot
language model evaluation. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5371628
[28] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. 2021.
Datasheets for Datasets. arXiv:1803.09010 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09010 arXiv: 1803.09010.
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
[29] Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2020. RealToxicityPrompts: Evaluating Neural Toxic Degeneration
in Language Models. ArXiv abs/2009.11462 (2020).
[30] Mary Gray and Siddharth Suri. 2019. Ghost Work. Mariner Books. https://ghostwork.info/
[31] Soyeon Caren Han, Taejun Lim, Siqu Long, Bernd Burgstaller, and Josiah Poon. 2021. GLocal-K: Global and Local Kernels for Recommender Systems.
(Aug. 2021). https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482112
[32] Laura Hanu and Unitary team. 2020. Detoxify. Published: Github. https://github.com/unitaryai/detoxify.
[33] F. Maxwell Harper and Joseph A. Konstan. 2015. The MovieLens Datasets: History and Context. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems
5, 4 (Dec. 2015), 19:1–19:19. https://doi.org/10.1145/2827872
[34] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring Massive Multitask
Language Understanding. arXiv:2009.03300 [cs] (Jan. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300 arXiv: 2009.03300.
[35] Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Unsolved Problems in ML Safety. arXiv:2109.13916 [cs] (Dec. 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13916 arXiv: 2109.13916.
[36] Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. 2021. Natural Adversarial Examples. arXiv:1907.07174 [cs, stat]
(March 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07174 arXiv: 1907.07174.
[37] Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo Jun, Tom B. Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray,
Chris Hallacy, Benjamin Mann, Alec Radford, Aditya Ramesh, Nick Ryder, Daniel M. Ziegler, John Schulman, Dario Amodei, and Sam McCandlish.
2020. Scaling Laws for Autoregressive Generative Modeling. arXiv:2010.14701 [cs] (Nov. 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.14701 arXiv: 2010.14701.
[38] Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. 2021. Scaling Laws for Transfer. arXiv:2102.01293 [cs] (Feb. 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01293 arXiv: 2102.01293.
[39] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad, Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and
Yanqi Zhou. 2017. Deep Learning Scaling is Predictable, Empirically. arXiv:1712.00409 [cs, stat] (Dec. 2017). http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00409 arXiv:
1712.00409.
[40] Daniel Ho, Jennifer King, Russell Wald, and Christopher Wan. 2021. Building a National AI Research Resource . White Paper. Stanford University.
https://hai.stanford.edu/white-paper-building-national-ai-research-resource
[41] Erik Hoel. 2021. Big Tech is replacing human artists with AI. https://erikhoel.substack.com/p/big-tech-is-replacing-human-artists
[42] AI Now Institute. 2021. Democratize AI? How the proposed National AI Research Resource falls short. https://medium.com/@AINowInstitute/
democratize-ai-how-the-proposed-national-ai-research-resource-falls-short-96ae5f67ccfa
[43] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. arXiv:2001.08361 [cs, stat] (Jan. 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361 arXiv: 2001.08361.
[44] Zachary Kenton, Tom Everitt, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, Vladimir Mikulik, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021. Alignment of Language Agents.
arXiv:2103.14659 [cs] (March 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.14659 arXiv: 2103.14659.
[45] Josh Kenway, Francois Camille, Sasha Costanza-Chock, Deborah Raji, Inioluwa, and Joy Buolamwini. 2022. Bug Bounties For Algorithmic Harms?
Technical Report. Algorithmic Justice League. https://www.ajl.org/bugs
[46] Boseop Kim, HyoungSeok Kim, Sang-Woo Lee, Gichang Lee, Donghyun Kwak, Dong Hyeon Jeon, Sunghyun Park, Sungju Kim, Seonhoon Kim,
Dongpil Seo, Heungsub Lee, Minyoung Jeong, Sungjae Lee, Minsub Kim, Suk Hyun Ko, Seokhun Kim, Taeyong Park, Jinuk Kim, Soyoung Kang,
Na-Hyeon Ryu, Kang Min Yoo, Minsuk Chang, Soobin Suh, Sookyo In, Jinseong Park, Kyungduk Kim, Hiun Kim, Jisu Jeong, Yong Goo Yeo, Donghoon
Ham, Dongju Park, Min Young Lee, Jaewook Kang, Inho Kang, Jung-Woo Ha, Woomyoung Park, and Nako Sung. 2021. What Changes Can Large-scale
Language Models Bring? Intensive Study on HyperCLOVA: Billions-scale Korean Generative Pretrained Transformers. arXiv:2109.04650 [cs] (Nov.
2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04650 arXiv: 2109.04650.
[47] Alex Knapp. 2012. How Much Does It Cost To Find A Higgs Boson? Forbes (June 2012). https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexknapp/2012/07/05/how-
much-does-it-cost-to-find-a-higgs-boson/ Section: Tech.
[48] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2012/file/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf
[49] Connor Leahy. 2022. Announcing GPT-NeoX-20B. https://blog.eleuther.ai/announcing-20b/
[50] Chuan Li. 2020. OpenAI’s GPT-3 Language Model: A Technical Overview. https://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3/
[51] Opher Lieber, Or Sharir, Barak Lenz, and Yoav Shoham. 2021. Jurassic-1: Technical Details And Evaluation. Technical Report. AI21 Labs.
[52] Andrew Lohn and Micha Musser. 2022. AI and Compute: How Much Longer Can Computing Power Drive Artificial Intelligence Progress? Technical
Report. Center for Security and Emerging Technology. https://doi.org/10.51593/2021CA009
[53] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and
Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model Cards for Model Reporting. Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Jan. 2019),
220–229. https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596 arXiv: 1810.03993.
[54] Shakir Mohamed, Marie-Therese Png, and William Isaac. 2020. Decolonial AI: Decolonial Theory as Sociotechnical Foresight in Artificial Intelligence.
Philosophy & Technology 33 (Dec. 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-020-00405-8
[55] Nick Walton [@nickwalton00]. 2020. I’ve noticed a number of people using AI Dungeon to test GPT-3’s abilities. While it’s a great way to see how
GPT-3 can power an interesting application. It’s a poor test of GPT-3’s abilities in general. The first generation of any custom prompt is actually
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
GPT-2. https://twitter.com/nickwalton00/status/1289946861478936577
[56] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean. 2021.
Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training. arXiv:2104.10350 [cs] (April 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.10350 arXiv: 2104.10350.
[57] Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia Glaese, Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. 2022. Red
Teaming Language Models with Language Models. arXiv:2202.03286 [cs] (Feb. 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03286 arXiv: 2202.03286.
[58] Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. 2022. Grokking: Generalization Beyond Overfitting on Small
Algorithmic Datasets. arXiv:2201.02177 [cs] (Jan. 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.02177 arXiv: 2201.02177.
[59] Shrimai Prabhumoye, Rafal Kocielnik, Mohammad Shoeybi, Anima Anandkumar, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2021. Few-shot Instruction Prompts for
Pretrained Language Models to Detect Social Biases. arXiv:2112.07868 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.07868 arXiv: 2112.07868.
[60] Gabriele Prato, Simon Guiroy, Ethan Caballero, Irina Rish, and Sarath Chandar. 2021. Scaling Laws for the Few-Shot Adaptation of Pre-trained
Image Classifiers. arXiv:2110.06990 [cs] (Oct. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06990 arXiv: 2110.06990.
[61] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack
Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. arXiv:2103.00020 [cs]
(Feb. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020 arXiv: 2103.00020.
[62] Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring,
Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan, Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins,
Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan,
Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato,
Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas Pajarskas,
Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark,
Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac,
Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021. Scaling Language Models: Methods, Analysis & Insights from Training Gopher. arXiv:2112.11446 [cs] (Dec.
2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11446 arXiv: 2112.11446.
[63] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Emily M. Bender, Amandalynne Paullada, Emily Denton, and Alex Hanna. 2021. AI and the Everything in the Whole Wide
World Benchmark. arXiv:2111.15366 [cs] (Nov. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2111.15366 arXiv: 2111.15366.
[64] Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini. 2019. Actionable Auditing: Investigating the Impact of Publicly Naming Biased Performance Results
of Commercial AI Products. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES ’19) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 429–435. https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314244
[65] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N. White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron,
and Parker Barnes. 2020. Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT* ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 33–44.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372873
[66] Jonathan S. Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. 2019. A Constructive Prediction of the Generalization Error Across Scales.
arXiv:1909.12673 [cs, stat] (Dec. 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12673 arXiv: 1909.12673.
[67] Cynthia Rudin, Caroline Wang, and Beau Coker. 2020. The Age of Secrecy and Unfairness in Recidivism Prediction. Harvard Data Science Review 2,
1 (March 2020). https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.6ed64b30
[68] Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao,
Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M. Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey,
Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Stella
Biderman, Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. 2021. Multitask Prompted Training Enables Zero-Shot Task Generalization.
arXiv:2110.08207 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.08207 arXiv: 2110.08207.
[69] Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren Etzioni. 2020. Green AI. Commun. ACM 63, 12 (Nov. 2020), 54–63. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3381831
[70] Jaime Sevilla, Pablo Villalobos, Juan Felipe Cerón, Matthew Burtell, Lennart Heim, Amogh B Nanjajjar, Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius
Hobbhahn, and Jean-Stanislas Denain. 2021. Parameter, Compute and Data Trends in Machine Learning. https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1AAIebjNsnJj_uKALHbXNfn3_YsT6sHXtCU0q7OIPuc4/
[71] Tom Simonite. 2021. What Really Happened When Google Ousted Timnit Gebru. Wired (June 2021). https://www.wired.com/story/google-timnit-
gebru-ai-what-really-happened/ Section: tags.
[72] Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George
Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Rewon Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad Shoeybi, Yuxiong He,
Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2022. Using DeepSpeed and Megatron to Train Megatron-Turing NLG 530B, A Large-Scale
Generative Language Model. arXiv:2201.11990 [cs] (Feb. 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11990 arXiv: 2201.11990.
19


===== PAGE 20 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
[73] Irene Solaiman and Christy Dennison. 2021. Process for Adapting Language Models to Society (PALMS) with Values-Targeted Datasets.
arXiv:2106.10328 [cs] (Nov. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10328 arXiv: 2106.10328.
[74] Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. 2019. Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP. arXiv:1906.02243 [cs]
(June 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02243 arXiv: 1906.02243.
[75] Alex Tamkin, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli. 2021. Understanding the Capabilities, Limitations, and Societal Impact of Large
Language Models. arXiv:2102.02503 [cs] (Feb. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02503 arXiv: 2102.02503.
[76] Latitude Team. 2020. AI Dungeon: Dragon Model Upgrade. https://aidungeon.medium.com/ai-dungeon-dragon-model-upgrade-7e8ea579abfe
[77] Will Thomas. 2020. Flagship Neutrino Project Working to Keep Costs Within Cap. https://www.aip.org/fyi/2020/flagship-neutrino-project-
working-keep-costs-within-cap Publisher: American Institute of Physics.
[78] Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu
Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will
Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny Soraker, Ben
Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo,
Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas,
Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc Le. 2022. LaMDA: Language Models for Dialog Applications. arXiv:2201.08239 [cs] (Jan. 2022).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08239 arXiv: 2201.08239.
[79] Ted Underwood. 2021. Science fiction hasn’t prepared us to imagine machine learning. https://tedunderwood.com/2021/02/02/why-sf-hasnt-
prepared-us-to-imagine-machine-learning/
[80] Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. 2021. GPT-J-6B: A 6 Billion Parameter Autoregressive Language Model. https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-
transformer-jax
[81] Shuohuan Wang, Yu Sun, Yang Xiang, Zhihua Wu, Siyu Ding, Weibao Gong, Shikun Feng, Junyuan Shang, Yanbin Zhao, Chao Pang, Jiaxiang Liu,
Xuyi Chen, Yuxiang Lu, Weixin Liu, Xi Wang, Yangfan Bai, Qiuliang Chen, Li Zhao, Shiyong Li, Peng Sun, Dianhai Yu, Yanjun Ma, Hao Tian, Hua
Wu, Tian Wu, Wei Zeng, Ge Li, Wen Gao, and Haifeng Wang. 2021. ERNIE 3.0 Titan: Exploring Larger-scale Knowledge Enhanced Pre-training for
Language Understanding and Generation. arXiv:2112.12731 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.12731 arXiv: 2112.12731.
[82] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y. Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V. Le. 2021. Finetuned
Language Models Are Zero-Shot Learners. arXiv:2109.01652 [cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.01652 arXiv: 2109.01652.
[83] Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa
Kasirzadeh, Zac Kenton, Sasha Brown, Will Hawkins, Tom Stepleton, Courtney Biles, Abeba Birhane, Julia Haas, Laura Rimell, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
William Isaac, Sean Legassick, Geoffrey Irving, and Iason Gabriel. 2021. Ethical and social risks of harm from Language Models. arXiv:2112.04359
[cs] (Dec. 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04359 arXiv: 2112.04359.
[84] Johannes Welbl, Amelia Glaese, Jonathan Uesato, Sumanth Dathathri, John Mellor, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kirsty Anderson, Pushmeet Kohli, Ben
Coppin, and Po-Sen Huang. 2021. Challenges in Detoxifying Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 2447–2469. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.210
[85] Jess Whittlestone and Jack Clark. 2021. Why and How Governments Should Monitor AI Development. arXiv:2108.12427 [cs] (Aug. 2021).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.12427 arXiv: 2108.12427.
[86] M. J. Wolf, K. W. Miller, and F. S. Grodzinsky. 2017. Why We Should Have Seen That Coming: Comments on Microsoft’s Tay “Experiment, ” and
Wider Implications. The ORBIT Journal 1, 2 (Jan. 2017), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.29297/orbit.v1i2.49
[87] Shaohua Wu, Xudong Zhao, Tong Yu, Rongguo Zhang, Chong Shen, Hongli Liu, Feng Li, Hong Zhu, Jiangang Luo, Liang Xu, and Xuanwei
Zhang. 2021. Yuan 1.0: Large-Scale Pre-trained Language Model in Zero-Shot and Few-Shot Learning. arXiv:2110.04725 [cs] (Oct. 2021). http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2110.04725 arXiv: 2110.04725.
[88] Jing Xu, Da Ju, Margaret Li, Y.-Lan Boureau, Jason Weston, and Emily Dinan. 2021. Bot-Adversarial Dialogue for Safe Conversational Agents. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021 , Kristina Toutanova, Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard,
Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2950–2968. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
2021.naacl-main.235
[89] Wei Zeng, Xiaozhe Ren, Teng Su, Hui Wang, Yi Liao, Zhiwei Wang, Xin Jiang, ZhenZhang Yang, Kaisheng Wang, Xiaoda Zhang, Chen Li, Ziyan
Gong, Yifan Yao, Xinjing Huang, Jun Wang, Jianfeng Yu, Qi Guo, Yue Yu, Yan Zhang, Jin Wang, Hengtao Tao, Dasen Yan, Zexuan Yi, Fang Peng,
Fangqing Jiang, Han Zhang, Lingfeng Deng, Yehong Zhang, Zhe Lin, Chao Zhang, Shaojie Zhang, Mingyue Guo, Shanzhi Gu, Gaojun Fan, Yaowei
Wang, Xuefeng Jin, Qun Liu, and Yonghong Tian. 2021. PanGu-$\alpha$: Large-scale Autoregressive Pretrained Chinese Language Models with
Auto-parallel Computation. arXiv:2104.12369 [cs] (April 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.12369 arXiv: 2104.12369.
[90] Donglin Zhuang, Xingyao Zhang, Shuaiwen Leon Song, and Sara Hooker. 2021. Randomness In Neural Network Training: Characterizing The
Impact of Tooling. arXiv:2106.11872 [cs] (June 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11872 arXiv: 2106.11872.
20


===== PAGE 21 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
A APPENDIX
A.1 Author Contribution Statement
Jack Clark, Deep Ganguli, and Dario Amodei wrote the paper, with helpful comments from everyone at Anthropic.
Jack Clark conceptualized the first drafts of the paper, and constructed the main arguments in Sections 3, and 4
Deep Ganguli performed all experiments and analyses in Sections 2, created the figures, and helped frame and write the
main arguments in the paper.
Dario Amodei gave detailed feedback throughout the project and provided guidance on the overall framing of the paper
and experiments.
Christopher Olah gave initial feedback on early drafts of the paper and contributed numerous insights relating to how
capabilities can emerge abruptly at different scales.
Liane Lovitt suggested ways to frame the paper to better communicate insights to policymakers.
Danny Hernandez carried out analysis of compute usage of academia versus industry.
Dawn Drain provided an analysis of how AI developers may use scaling laws.
Jared Kaplan helped with initial conceptualization of the project, wrote the infrastructure used to carry out the
experiments, advised Deep Ganguli throughout the project, and made comments on the paper.
Neel Nanda, Liane Lovitt, Danny Hernandez, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, and Daniela Amodei made extensive comments to
the paper.
Amanda Askell provided feedback on the COMPAS experiment, and the broader arguments being made in the paper.
Led by Tom Brown in collaboration with Sam McCandlish, much of the technical staff at Anthropic contributed
to efficient distributed model training and sampling, the underlying ML, and cluster stability. Contributors include
Nicholas Joseph, Tom Henighan, and Andy Jones. Nelson Elhage, Kamal Ndousse, Zac Hatfield-Dodds. Ben Mann also
contributed to this infrastructure and built the human feedback interface. Jackson Kernion managed the crowd workers
and maintained the infrastructure.
Sam McCandlish led model pretraining efforts, often in collaboration with Jared Kaplan.
Tom Henighan managed our research cluster, helped build our distributed training system. He also helped with
ML research on large language models. Nova DasSarma has also helped manage the cluster.
21


===== PAGE 22 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
Andy Jones was central in building our sampling infrastructure. He also provided engineering support to Deep
Ganguli for all experiments.
A.2 How Developers Use Scaling Laws
Developers may use scaling laws in a variety of ways, some of which we outline here.
(1) To empirically estimate the compute-efficient frontier — the lowest possible test loss one can achieve within
a fixed compute budget. This can help developers forecast the theoretical costs of training large models and
allocate resources accordingly.
(2) To infer whether simple increases in scale may have the potential to unlock capabilities that don’t work at smaller
scale. This helps developers forecast progress in AI and to tackle more ambitious problems.
(3) To quantitatively test whether enhancements other than scaling (e.g. hyper-parameter tuning, novel architecture
design, etc.) actually matter as models increase in scale. If these non-scale based changes do not give improvements
at scale, then developers can allocate developer time to pursuing scale relative to other alternatives.
(4) To debug model training. If a bigger model is not doing better than a smaller model, then developers know to
prioritize looking for possible bugs inherent only to models of sufficient scale. Some commonly encountered
bugs that become increasingly pernicious with scale involve numerical precision issues, data quality issues,
over-fitting issues, and hardware related issues.
(5) To evaluate the performance of models on a common scale. Often, different researchers publish results for models
of different sizes. A researcher can use scaling laws to infer how much of the differences in model accuracy
are merely due to scale, and also how differently sized models compare to one’s own models after accounting
for scale. For instance, an improved approach might be comparable to a 10% model size increase. Knowing this
information gives two separate options for pursuing such a model improvement.
A.3 Recommendation System Experiment
To illustrate how smooth general capability scaling (discussed in Section 2.1) may correlate with task performance and
forecast economic value, we perform a small original experiment where we analyze the relationship between scale
and capabilities for GPT-3-like language models [3] to be used as recommendation systems with zero-shot learning.
We choose a recommendation system example because these systems have tangible economic relevance and societal
impact.
Figure 8 shows that language models smoothly decrease in the standard Root Mean Square Error (RMSE, lower is
better) metric on the widely used Movielens 1M movie recommendation system task [33] as they increase in size. The
smallest model achieves a significantly better RMSE (1.06) than chance (RMSE 1.91), and the largest model achieves a
significantly lower RMSE (0.94) than a strong baseline model (RMSE 0.98, see below for further details). Although no
models achieve state of the art (SOTA) performance (RMSE 0.82), these results are still surprising because the language
models (in our zero-shot setting) see two orders of magnitude less training data than the SOTA model.
Trends like those in Figure 8 forecast how much it would likely cost to develop a state-of-the-art capability on an
economically valuable task. In this particular case, we get an incredulous result - at 800T parameters, a language model
will achieve state of the art performance with zero-shot learning. This number indicates that it’s unlikely language
models will be used as commercially deployed recommendation systems in this manner for several years (and that
22


===== PAGE 23 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
107
108
109
1010
Number of Parameters
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05LM RMSE
Strong Baseline
SOTA
Reccomendation System Benchmark
Fig. 8 Language models can perform as zero-shot recommendation systems with increasing scale. This demonstrates how general
capability scaling can correlate with an economically valuable task as described in Section 2.1.
even then it might not be worth its costs).23 But the results of a different experiment (e.g. a fine-tuned language model
trained explicitly to solve this task), could have justified expenditure rather than advising against it. As such, scaling
laws can de-risk investment without saying anything about the detailed behavior of the model in specific cases.
More specific technical details are as follows. To perform this experiment, we chose the Movielens 1M (1 million
ratings) dataset [33] both because of its widespread use, the fact that it contains demographic information about users
(age, occupation, gender, zip code), and because we have observed language models to have considerable knowledge
about movies (presumably due to a preponderance of text on the internet about movies).
The dataset consists of ∼ 4K movies rated by ∼ 6K users on a scale of 1-5. On average, each user has rated ∼ 160
movies, which means 96% of the data are missing. The goal of a recommendation system is to predict these missing
values, which anticipate how a user will rate a movie they have not previously rated before.
To evaluate performance on this task, we take the standard approach of partitioning the data into a train and test set,
using 1% of the total dataset (10K ratings) as our test set. Performance on this task is typically reported as the root
mean squared error (RMSE) between the predicted and actual ratings on the test set. Perfect predictions would yield an
RMSE of 0 and random guessing corresponds to an RMSE of 1.91. A strong baseline model simply assigns the average
rating (averaged across all users) in the train set as the predicted ratings for all movies in the test set. This essentially
ranks movies by their overall popularity, independent of any personalization. The strong baseline achieves an RMSE of
0.98. State of the art performance on this dataset, is currently an RMSE of 0.822 according to [31].24
In general, state of the art algorithms rely on matrix completion (also known as matrix factorization) algorithms,
which simply try to impute the missing values in the user-by-movie matrix by expressing this matrix as the outer product
of a small number of low dimensional latent vectors, which are learned from the training data, in order to explicitly
minimize the RMSE between predicted and actual ratings. Algorithms with lower RMSEs are typically parameterized
by neural network models.
It’s unclear how to use language models as matrix factorizers. Instead, we employ similar zero-shot learning approach
with the following prompt:
A {age} {gender} who is employed as an {occupation} previously rated
{list_of_movies_and_ratings_from_training_set} will rate
{movie_from_test_set} a
We replace the variables in curly braces with their corresponding values from the training set (for the first 4 variables)
and test set (for the last variable). We then compute the probability that the language model will predict the next token
23Of course, algorithmic improvement that shifts the scaling laws is still possible.
24https://paperswithcode.com/sota/collaborative-filtering-on-movielens-1m
23


===== PAGE 24 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
in the sequence as a 1, 2, 3, 4, or a 5. Finally, we compute the weighted mean of the ratings, where the weights
are equal to the probabilities (which are normalized to sum to 1) the language model assigns to those ratings as the
final rating prediction.
We use zero-shot learning because the variable, list_of_movies_and_ratings_from_training_set, can often
correspond to a very long sequence of text, since on average users have rated ∼ 200 movies. Because our models have a
fundamental limit on how large input text sequences can be, as determined by the context window length, we randomly
sample up to 500 previously rated movies per user, in order to stay within the limits. An alternative strategy is to use
few-shot learning, where multiple users are provided as examples in the prompt, but only show a small number, e.g., 5,
of previously rated movies per user. Empirically, we found that our zero-shot approach (one user, but a lot of previously
rated movies by that user) led to far lower RMSE than all of our few-shot learning experiments.
There is a movie recommendation task for language models in the BigBench framework based on a Movielens
benchmark.25 However, this task is formulated specifically for a language model, in the form of a multiple choice task
as opposed to a regression or matrix completion task. Our formulation of this task allows us to directly compare general
purpose language models to special purpose systems on the same axis in order to assess a more realistic capability.
Finally, we note that we can extend the analysis we do here to other economically valuable real-world tasks such as
those in the recent Real-World Few-Shot Text-Classification (RAFT) benchmark [1].
A.4 COMPAS Experiment
We use the same dataset, filtering operations, and metrics used for the ProPublica analysis of COMPAS [ 2] (taken
directly from the Ipython Notebook on GitHub).26 We use the same prompt as [22] (which was designed for a human
recidivism prediction experiment) for the language model:
The defendant is a {sex} aged {age}. They have been charged with:
{c_charge_desc}. This crime is classified as a {c_charge_degree}.
They have been convicted of {priors_count} prior crimes. They
have {juv_fel_count} juvenile felony charges and {juv_misd_count}
juvenile misdemeanor charges on their record.
Do you think this person will commit another crime within 2 years?
We replace the variables in curly braces with values for each defendant in the dataset. Following [22] we also consider a
prompt in which race is included, by changing the first sentence in the above prompt to be:
The defendant is a {race} {sex} aged {age} . We rely on few-shot learning [ 11], in which we provide the
language model with 50 labeled examples taken at random from the training dataset (less than 1% of the data) before
querying the models on each independent test prompt.
Next, given the prompt above, we compute the probability that the next token in the prompt is a Yes and a No.
We normalize these two probabilities to sum to 1. We then directly compare the probability of a Yes response to the
ground-truth label as to whether or not the defendant in question actually re-offended, in addition to the analogous
prediction provided by COMPAS. We use the Fairlearn Python package27 to compute all metrics reported in the main
text.
25https://github.com/google/BIG-bench/blob/main/bigbench/benchmark_tasks/movie_recommendation/README.md
26https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis
27https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn
24


===== PAGE 25 =====
Predictability and Surprise in Large Generative Models FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea
107
108
109
1010
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05Predictive Accuracy Ratio
COMPAS
Fair
Black to white Accuracy Ratio
Fig. 9 Predictive accuracy ratio for Black versus white defendants. A value of 1 is fair. COMPAS achieves a value of 0.97. The
language models show no clear trend in this ratio, regardless of when race is excluded in the prompt (blue) or included (orange).
However, the largest language models are slightly less equitable than COMPAS according to this metric.
In addition to the metrics reported in the main text, we also examined the predictive accuracy ratio for Black versus
white defendants as in [2, 22]. We saw no clear trends with model size (Figure 9) regardless of whether race was excluded
from the prompt (blue) or included (orange). Though the largest language models are slightly less fair than COMPAS
according to this metric.
Our analysis suffers from several important caveats. First, it is well known that there are many more fairness metrics
than the two we consider here, and that it’s statistically impossible for a single algorithm to achieve parity on all these
metrics e.g., [26]. Second, benchmark risk assessment instrument datasets often contain numerous measurement biases
and errors which can make them ill-suited for making claims about real-world impact without carefully considering
the the complicated socio-technical systems (in this case, the US criminal justice system) in which they are used [6].
Finally, comparisons to proprietary algorithms will always be difficult to make precise without either significant reverse
engineering or pressure from companies to lead to more transparent algorithms [67].
A.5 Open Ended Outputs and Creative Expression
Capabilities may emerge in areas that are challenging to evaluate quantitatively, and therefore likely to resist systematic
analysis. A key example is the case of AI models mimicking human creative expression. As a concrete example, we
provide28 a sample of over three thousand imitation poems generated randomly from a large language model (more
accurately, these are samples generated from a prompt including several modern and contemporary poems, so a small
fraction of the samples are not actually poems). We cannot provide any official evaluation, but informally we find both
the quality of some of the texts, and the imitation of specific authorial styles quite impressive. Some professional writers
who are aware of the growing capabilities of large language models are very impressed [41], but also alarmed by their
far-reaching implications. Academics outside of engineering departments are also starting to consider the pros and
cons of machine creativity [79].
A.6 Toxicity Experiment Details
We follow a similar analysis outlined in [3] where we leverage the RealToxicityPrompts [29] dataset to elicit short
comments in response to real world samples of text (prompts) obtained from the internet. Following [29], we label the
prompts as ‘toxic’ if they have a toxicity score> 0.5, otherwise we label them ‘non-toxic’. We then obtain a random
28https://gist.github.com/jareddk/6512393d4a996fbf3a72be265a5285aa
25


===== PAGE 26 =====
FAccT ’22, June 21–24, 2022, Seoul, Republic of Korea Ganguli, et al.
sample of 1K of these prompts, with an equal proportion of ‘toxic’ and ‘non-toxic’. Next, we we sample25 model
responses from language models of various sizes [3] per prompt. We use the same prompts per language model.
We then measure the toxicity of the model responses with an open-source toxicity detector [32] that outputs a score,
between 0 and 1, with a higher score corresponding to more toxic content. Next, we fit a linear regression model, where
we predict the toxicity score based on a categorical coding of model size, and a binary indicator as to whether the
prompt was labeled as toxic or non-toxic. We plot the estimated coefficients on model size (thus controlling for the
toxicity of the prompt) and the 95% confidence intervals around them in the main text.
Our analysis is subject to several caveats. First, it’s unclear how the magnitude of the effect size in Figure 5 influences
human perception of the toxicity of the generated text. Different people often have different perceptions about text
with the same toxicity score [84]. Second, automated toxicity detection algorithms are known to suffer from several
limitations, for example, they can be biased for certain minority groups [29, 84]. Finally, our reliance on an open-source
toxicity detector [32] is counter to the more common use of the Perspective API for toxicity detection (though we
believe these toxicity detectors to be similar[3]).
A.7 AI and Compute Analysis Details
We leverage data from existing work on estimating compute usage for training large-scale AI models 29 which was
recently complemented with additional data from more recent experiments [70]. In this augmented dataset, we label
training runs as Industry or Academic based primarily on affiliations of first authors. If a first author had a dual
affiliation, we labeled the run as industry, because in practice we’ve found that with access to both, industry-controlled
compute is the preferred path. The fit it in Figure 7 (Right) is based on a LOWESS regression with default parameters
from the Seaborn Python package. These data are incomplete and should be interpreted carefully due to sampling
bias. For example, we do not have access to compute estimates for industrial models used in production for search,
recommendation engines, or self driving cars.
29https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/
26