

===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of Machine Learning Research 25 (2024) 1-59 Submitted 11/23; Revised 10/24; Published 10/24
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Florentin Guth∗ florentin.guth@nyu.edu
Center for Data Science, New York University, 60 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10011, USA
Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
Brice Ménard menard@jhu.edu
Department of Physics & Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
Gaspar Rochette gaspar.rochette@ens.fr
Département d’informatique, École Normale Supérieure, CNRS, PSL University
45 rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris, France
Stéphane Mallat stephane.mallat@ens.fr
Collège de France, 11, place Marcelin-Berthelot 75231 Paris, France
Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
Editor: Lorenzo Rosasco
Abstract
A central question in deep learning is to understand the functions learned by deep networks.
What is their approximation class? Do the learned weights and representations depend on
initialization? Previous empirical work has evidenced that kernels deﬁned by network acti-
vations are similar across initializations. For shallow networks, this has been theoretically
studied with random feature models, but an extension to deep networks has remained elu-
sive. Here, we provide a deep extension of such random feature models, which we call the
rainbow model. We prove that rainbow networks deﬁne deterministic (hierarchical) kernels
in the inﬁnite-width limit. The resulting functions thus belong to a data-dependent RKHS
which does not depend on the weight randomness. We also verify numerically our mod-
eling assumptions on deep CNNs trained on image classiﬁcation tasks, and show that the
trained networks approximately satisfy the rainbow hypothesis. In particular, rainbow net-
works sampled from the corresponding random feature model achieve similar performance
as the trained networks. Our results highlight the central role played by the covariances
of network weights at each layer, which are observed to be low-rank as a result of feature
learning.
Keywords: deep neural networks, inﬁnite-width limit, random features, representation
alignment, weight covariance.
1. Introduction
The weight matrices of deep networks are learned by performing stochastic gradient descent
from a random initialization. Each training run thus results in a diﬀerent set of weights,
which can be considered as a random realization of some probability distribution. This
randomness is a major challenge in analyzing the learned weights. Finding deterministic
∗Work done while at École Normale Supérieure.
c⃝2024 Florentin Guth, Brice Ménard, Gaspar Rochette, and Stéphane Mallat.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v25/23-1573.html.


===== PAGE 2 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Figure 1: A deep rainbow network cascades random feature maps whose weight distributions are
learned. They typically have a low-rank covariance. Each layer can be factorized into
a linear dimensionality reduction determined by the “colored” (i.e., non-identity) covari-
ance, followedbyanon-linearhigh-dimensionalembeddingwith“white”randomfeatures.
At each layer, the hidden activations deﬁne a kernel which converges to a deterministic
rainbow kernel in the inﬁnite-width limit. The activations are however randomly rotated,
which induces a similar rotation of the next layer weights.
quantities which are independent of the details of the initialization and training is thus of
great importance to study deep learning.
A prominent example is the kernels deﬁned by hidden activations of wide networks, as
has been empirically shown by Raghu et al. (2017); Kornblith et al. (2019). That is, if we
denote ˆφj(x) and ˆφ′
j(x) the j-th layer feature maps of two wide networks,
⟨ˆφj(x), ˆφj(x′)⟩≈⟨ ˆφ′
j(x), ˆφ′
j(x′)⟩, ∀j, x, x′. (1)
This concentration of kernels has been studied in one-hidden-layer networks in the “mean-
ﬁeld” limit. Under this limit, neuron weightsw1, . . . , wd1 can be modeled as independent
samples from a distribution π1. The ﬁrst layer thus computes random features ˆφ1(x) =
1√
d1
(σ(⟨wi, x⟩))i≤d1, whose kernel concentrates as a consequence of the law of large numbers
(Rahimi and Recht, 2007):
⟨ˆφ1(x), ˆφ1(x′)⟩ = 1
d1
d1∑
i=1
σ(⟨wi, x⟩) σ(⟨wi, x′⟩)−−−−→
d1→∞
Ew∼π1
[
σ(⟨w, x⟩) σ(⟨w, x′⟩)
]
. (2)
Although diﬀerent networks may have diﬀerent weightsw′
i̸= wi (even up to permutations),
the key point is that they are sampled from the same distributionπ1. Equation (1) is then a
consequence of eq. (2). However, it is not clear a priori how to extend this analysis beyond
the ﬁrst layer.
In this paper, we introduce a deep extension of the shallow random feature model above
to explain eq. (1) at all layers. It rests on the observation that weight distributions in hidden
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
layers need to bealigned based on the previous layer weights. Indeed, the concentration of
kernels is equivalent to the concentration of activationsup to rotations: a restatement of
eq. (1) is that there exists orthogonal transformsˆAj such that
ˆφj(x)≈ ˆAj ˆφ′
j(x), ∀j, x.
In the one-layer random feature model,ˆA1̸= Id arises from the diﬀerences between indi-
vidual neuron weightsw′
i̸= wi. We empirically observe that weights in hidden layers also
rotate together with their input activations: that is, the distribution of weights at layerj +1
are the sameafter a rotation by ˆAj. When taken as an assumption, this allows iterating
the argument in eq. (2) to establish eq. (1) at all layers. In summary, kernels concentrate
because the underlying weight distributions are the same, and activations rotate because
the individual neurons are diﬀerent samples from these common distributions. The rain-
bow model captures the interaction between these two properties across layers, shedding a
theoretical light on the phenomenological eq. (1).
The rainbow model is parameterized by random feature distributions for each layer.
A special case of interest arises when these distributions are assumed to be Gaussian and
centered, so that the model is entirely speciﬁed by weight covariance matrices. While the
resulting Gaussian rainbow model appears too restrictive to model all trained networks, we
show that it can approximately hold for architectures which incorporate prior information
and restrict their learned weights. In some of our numerical experiments, we will thus
consider learned scattering networks (Zarka et al., 2021; Guth et al., 2022), which have
ﬁxed wavelet spatial ﬁlters and learn weights along channels only.
Under the Gaussian rainbow model, the weight covariances completely specify the net-
work output. The eigenvectors of these weight covariances can be interpreted as learned fea-
tures, rather than individual neuron weights which are random. We show numerically that
weights of trained networks typically have low-rank covariances. The corresponding rain-
bow networks thus implement dimensionality reductions in-between the high-dimensional
random feature embeddings. We further demonstrate that input activation covariances pro-
vide eﬃcient approximations of the eigenspaces of the weight covariances. The number of
model parameters and hence the supervised learning complexity can thus be considerably
reduced by unsupervised information.
This paper makes the following main contributions:
• We numerically demonstrate that both hidden activations and weight distributions
(speciﬁcally, their covariances) of deep networks trained from diﬀerent initializations
concentrate up to rotations when the width increases. This complements previous
observations of concentration of the kernels deﬁned by the activations.
• We prove that networks sampled from the rainbow model deﬁne activations which
converge to a random rotation of a deterministic kernel feature vector in the inﬁnite-
width limit. In random feature models, the concentration of kernels and activations
up to rotations is thus a consequence of the rotation of the weight distributions.
• We validate empirically the stronger Gaussian rainbow model for scattering networks
trained on CIFAR-10. We verify that the learned weights are approximately Gaus-
sian. Their covariances are suﬃcient to sample new networks that achieve comparable
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
classiﬁcation accuracy when the width is large enough. Further, we show that SGD
training only updates the weight covariances while nearly preserving the white random
feature initializations, suggesting a possible dynamical explanation for the Gaussian
rainbow assumption in this setting.
• We show that the weight covariances of trained deep networks are approximately
low-rank, and their dimensionality can be reduced without harming performance by
performing PCA on the weights. Further, this can be well-approximated by a PCA
on the input activations. In the context of the Gaussian rainbow model, this shows
that feature learning amounts to ﬁnding an informative subspace, which can be ap-
proximated with unsupervised information. More generally, these observations reveal
properties of the weight distributions in trained networks that can also be of indepen-
dent interest.
The rainbow model is illustrated in Figure 1. In Section 2, we introduce rainbow net-
works and the associated kernels that describe their inﬁnite-width limit. We validate numer-
ically the above properties and results in Section 3. Code to reproduce all our experiments
can be found athttps://github.com/FlorentinGuth/Rainbow.
1.1 Related work
Several strands of research have studied functional properties of neural networks. However,
they only apply to networks around their initialization, or to shallow networks. We brieﬂy
review these lines of research, and show how our work addresses some of the gaps in the
literature.
Lazy versus feature learning. For some weight initialization schemes, Jacot et al.
(2018) and Lee et al. (2019) have shown that trained weights have vanishing deviations
from their initialization. In these cases, learning is in a “lazy” regime (Chizat et al., 2019)
speciﬁedbyaﬁxedkernel. Ithasbeenopposedtoa“rich”orfeature-learningregime(Chizat
and Bach, 2020; Woodworth et al., 2020), which achieves higher performance on complex
tasks (Lee et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2020). While we do not model training dynamics,
the rainbow model captures weight distributions that are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from their
initialization. These weight distributions depend on the training data, and thus induce a
data-dependent kernel, indirectly incorporating feature learning.
Random features and neural network Gaussian processes.In a diﬀerent but re-
lated direction, many works have considered networks where all but the last layers are
frozen to their initialization, starting from (Jarrett et al., 2009; Pinto et al., 2009). Such
networks compute random features, which specify a kernel that becomes deterministic in
the inﬁnite-width limit. This was ﬁrst studied by Rahimi and Recht (2007) for the one-
layer case and generalized to deep architectures by Daniely et al. (2016). As a result, in
the inﬁnite-width, networks at initialization represent a function sampled randomly from
a Gaussian process (Neal, 1996; Williams, 1996; Lee et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2018).
Training is then modeled as performing Bayesian inference by conditioning this prior on the
training data. These approaches thus correspond to performing regression with a ﬁxed ker-
nel, again precluding feature learning (though ﬁnite-width corrections can be incorporated,
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
see Seroussi et al., 2023). Our theoretical results extend this line of work by considering
much more general weight distributions, which incorporate dependencies across layers as a
result of feature learning.
Mean-ﬁeld models. Feature learning has been precisely studied for one-hidden-layer
networks, again in the inﬁnite-width limit (Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rot-
skoﬀ and Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020). These “mean-ﬁeld”
approaches analyze the neuron weight distribution as it evolves away from the normal ini-
tialization during training. However, generalizing this result to deeper networks has been
challenging due to the dependence between weights across layers (Sirignano and Spiliopou-
los, 2022; E and Wojtowytsch, 2020; Nguyen and Pham, 2020; Chen et al., 2022; Yang and
Hu, 2021). In this work, we propose a model of such a dependence through the use of
representation alignment.
Representation alignment and hierarchical kernels. A key observation for gener-
alizing mean-ﬁeld random feature models to deeper networks was made by Raghu et al.
(2017); Kornblith et al. (2019). They demonstrated empirically that after an alignment
procedure, activations of deep networks trained on the same task from diﬀerent initializa-
tions become increasingly similar as the width increases, at all layers. Equivalently, the
activations at a given layer asymptotically deﬁne the same deterministic kernel indepen-
dently of the initialization (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008; Williams et al., 2021). The network
thus belongs to a hierarchical reproducing kernel Hilbert space similar to the ones studied
by Cho and Saul (2009); Anselmi et al. (2015); Mairal (2016); Bietti (2019). However,
characterizing these kernels requires understanding how they depend on the data distribu-
tion in order to capture feature learning. This was done for the one-layer case by Pandey
et al. (2022) by considering structured (non-isotropic) random feature kernels. Bordelon
and Pehlevan (2022) characterized the evolution of activation and gradient kernels in deep
networks during training with self-consistent equations from dynamical mean-ﬁeld theory,
which are often challenging to solve. Our rainbow model builds on these ideas to give an
integrated picture of the approximation class of deep neural networks.
2. Rainbow networks
Weight matrices of learned deep networks are strongly dependent across layers. Deep rain-
bow networks deﬁne a mathematical model of these dependencies through rotation matrices
that align input activations at each layer. We review in Section 2.1 the properties of random
features, which are the building blocks of the model. We then introduce in Section 2.2 deep
fully-connected rainbow networks, which cascade aligned random feature maps. We show
in Section 2.3 how to incorporate inductive biases in the form of symmetries or local neuron
receptive ﬁelds. We also extend rainbow models to convolutional networks.
2.1 Rotations in random feature maps
We being by reviewing the properties of one-hidden layer random feature networks. We then
prove that random weight ﬂuctuations produce a random rotation of the hidden activations
in the limit of inﬁnite width (in a sense made precise in Theorem 1 below). The rainbow
model will allow us to apply this result at all layers of a deep network in Section 2.2.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Random feature network. A one-hidden layer network computes a hidden activation
layer with a matrixW of size d1× d0 and a pointwise non-linearityσ:
ˆϕ(x) = σ(W x) for x∈ Rd0.
We consider a random feature network (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). The rows ofW, which
contain the weights of diﬀerent neurons, are independent and have the same probability
distribution π:
W = (wi)i≤d1 with i.i.d. wi∼ π.
In many random feature models, each row vector has a known distribution with uncorrelated
coeﬃcients (Jarrett et al., 2009; Pinto et al., 2009). Learning is then reduced to calculating
the output weightsˆθ, which deﬁne
ˆf(x) =⟨ˆθ, ˆϕ(x)⟩.
In contrast, we consider general distributionsπ which will be estimated from the weights
of trained networks in Section 3. Considering more general random feature distributions
with non-identity covariance has been shown to greatly improve modeling of sensory neuron
receptive ﬁelds (Pandey et al., 2022).
Our network does not include any bias for simplicity. Bias-free networks have been
shown to achieve comparable performance as networks with biases for denoising (Mohan
et al., 2019) and image classiﬁcation (Zarka et al., 2021; Guth et al., 2022). However, biases
can easily be incorporated in random feature models and thus rainbow networks.
We consider a normalized network, whereσ includes a division by√d1 so that∥ ˆϕ(x)∥
remains of the order of unity when the widthd1 increases. We shall leave this normalization
implicit to simplify notations, except when illustrating mathematical convergence results.
Note that this choice diﬀers from the so-called standard parameterization (Yang and Hu,
2021). In numerical experiments, we perform SGD training with this standard parameteri-
zation which avoids getting trapped in the lazy training regime (Chizat et al., 2019). Our
normalization convention is only applied at the end of training, where the additional factor
of√d1 is absorbed in the next-layer weightsˆθ.
We require that the input data has ﬁnite energy:Ex[∥x∥2] < +∞. We further assume
that the non-linearity σ is Lipschitz continuous, which is veriﬁed by many non-linearities
used in practice, including ReLU. Finally, we require that the random feature distribution
π has ﬁnite fourth-order moments.
Kernel convergence. We now review the convergence properties of one-hidden layer
random feature networks. This convergence is captured by the convergence of their kernel
(Rahimi and Recht, 2007, 2008),
ˆk(x, x′) =⟨ ˆϕ(x), ˆϕ(x′)⟩ = 1
d1
d1∑
i=1
σ(⟨wi, x⟩) σ(⟨wi, x′⟩),
where we have made explicit the factord−1
1 coming from our choice of normalization. Since
the rows wi are independent and identically distributed, the law of large numbers implies
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
that when the widthd1 goes to inﬁnity, this empirical kernel has a mean-square convergence
to the asymptotic kernel
k(x, x′) = Ew∼π
[
σ(⟨w, x⟩) σ(⟨w, x′⟩)
]
. (3)
This convergence means that even though ˆϕ is random, its kernel is asymptotically de-
terministic. As we will see, this imposes that random ﬂuctuations ofˆϕ(x) are reduced to
rotations in the larged1 limit.
Let ϕ(x) be an inﬁnite-dimensional deterministic feature vector in a separable Hilbert
space H, which satisﬁes
⟨ϕ(x), ϕ(x′)⟩H = k(x, x′). (4)
Such feature vectors always exist (Aronszajn, 1950, see also Schölkopf and Smola, 2002). For
instance, one can chooseϕ(x) = ( σ(⟨w, x⟩))w, the inﬁnite-width limit of random features
σW. In that case,H = L2(π), that is, the space of square-integrable functions with respect
to π, with dot-product⟨g, h⟩H = Ew∼π[g(w) h(w)]. This choice is however not unique:
one can obtain other feature vectors deﬁned in other Hilbert spaces by applying a unitary
transformation toϕ, which does not modify the dot product in eq. (4). In the following, we
choose the kernel PCA (KPCA) feature vector, whose covariance matrixEx[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T] is
diagonal with decreasing values along the diagonal, introduced by Schölkopf et al. (1997). It
is obtained by expressing any feature vectorϕ in its PCA basis relative to the distribution
of x. In this caseH = ℓ2(N).
Finally, we denote byH the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated to the
kernel k in eq. (3). It is the space of functionsf which can be writtenf(x) =⟨θ, ϕ(x)⟩H,
with norm∥f∥H =∥θ∥H.1 A random feature network deﬁnes approximations of functions
in this RKHS. WithH = L2(π), these functions can be written
f(x) = Ew∼π[θ(w) σ(⟨w, x⟩)] =
∫
θ(w) σ(⟨w, x⟩) dπ(w).
This expression is equivalent to the mean-ﬁeld limit of one-hidden-layer networks (Chizat
andBach,2018;Meietal.,2018;RotskoﬀandVanden-Eijnden,2018;SirignanoandSpiliopou-
los, 2020), which we will generalize to deep networks in Section 2.2.
Rotational alignment. We now introduce rotations which align approximate kernel fea-
ture vectors. By abuse of language, we use rotations as a synonym for orthogonal transfor-
mations, and also include improper rotations which are the composition of a rotation with
a reﬂection. Here, we prove thataligned features vectors ˆϕ converge to their inﬁnite-width
counterpart ϕ.
We begin by an informal derivation of our main result. We have seen that the kernel
ˆk(x, x′) =⟨ ˆϕ(x), ˆϕ(x′)⟩convergestothekernel k(x, x′) =⟨ϕ(x), ϕ(x′)⟩. Wethusexpect, and
will later prove, that for large widths there exists a rotationˆA such that ˆA ˆϕ≈ ϕ (in a sense
made precise by Theorem 1 below), because all feature vectors of the kernelk are rotations
of one another. The rotation ˆA is dependent on the random feature realizationW and is
thus random. The network activationsˆϕ(x)≈ ˆATϕ(x) are therefore a random rotation of
1We shall always assume thatθ is the minimum-norm vector such thatf (x) = ⟨θ, ϕ(x)⟩H.
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
the deterministic feature vectorϕ(x). For the KPCA feature vectorϕ, ˆA approximately
computes an orthonormal change of coordinate ofˆϕ(x) to its PCA basis.
For any functionf(x) =⟨θ, ϕ(x)⟩H inH, if the output layer weights of the network are
ˆθ = ˆATθ, then the network output is
ˆf(x) =⟨ ˆATθ, ˆϕ(x)⟩ =⟨θ, ˆA ˆϕ(x)⟩H≈ f(x).
This means that the ﬁnal layer coeﬃcientsˆθ can cancel the random rotationˆA introduced
by W, so that the random network outputˆf(x) converges when the widthd1 increases to a
ﬁxed function inH. This propagation of rotations across layers is key to understanding the
weight dependencies in deep networks. We now make the above arguments more rigorous
and prove thatˆϕ and ˆf respectively converge toϕ and f, for an appropriate choice ofˆA.
We writeO(d1) the set of linear operators ˆA from Rd1 to H = ℓ2(N) which satisfy
ˆAT ˆA = Idd1. Each ˆA∈O (d1) computes an isometric embedding ofRd1 into H, while ˆAT is
an orthogonal projection onto ad1-dimensional subspace ofH which can be identiﬁed with
Rd1. The alignment ˆA of ˆϕ to ϕ is deﬁned as the minimizer of the mean squared error:
ˆA = arg min
ˆA∈O(d1)
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥
2
H
]
. (5)
This optimization problem, known as the (orthogonal) Procrustes problem (Hurley and
Cattell, 1962; Schönemann, 1966), admits a closed-form solution, computed from a singular
value decomposition of the (uncentered) cross-covariance matrix betweenϕ and ˆϕ:
ˆA = U V T with Ex
[
ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]
= U SV T. (6)
The mean squared error (5) of the optimalˆA (6) is then
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥
2
H
]
= tr Ex
[
ˆϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]
+tr Ex
[
ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T]
−2
Ex
[
ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]
1
, (7)
where∥·∥1 is the nuclear (or trace) norm, that is, the sum of the singular values. Equa-
tion (7) deﬁnes a distance between the representationsˆϕ and ϕ which is related to various
similarity measures used in the literature.2
The alignment rotation (5,6) was used by Haxby et al. (2011) to align fMRI response
patterns of human visual cortex from diﬀerent individuals, and by Smith et al. (2017)
2By normalizing the variance of ϕ and ˆϕ, eq. (7) can be turned into a similarity measure
∥Ex[ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]∥1/
√
Ex[∥ϕ(x)∥2]Ex[∥ ˆϕ(x)∥2]. It is related to the kernel alignment used by Cristianini et al.
(2001); Cortes et al. (2012); Kornblith et al. (2019), although the latter is based on the Frobenius norm
of the cross-covariance matrixEx[ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T] rather than the nuclear norm. Both similarity measures are
invariant to rotations of eitherϕ or ˆϕ and therefore only depend on the kernelsk and ˆk, but the nuclear
norm has a geometrical interpretation in terms of an explicit alignment rotation (6). Further, Appendix A
shows that the formulation (7) has connections to optimal transport through the Bures-Wasserstein dis-
tance (Bhatia et al., 2019). Canonical correlation analysis also provides an alignment, although not in
the form of a rotation. It is based on a singular value decomposition of the cross-correlation matrix
Ex[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T]−1/2 Ex[ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T] Ex[ ˆϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]−1/2 rather than the cross-covariance, and is thus sensi-
tive to noise in the estimation of the covariance matrices (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018). Equiv-
alently, it corresponds to replacing ϕ and ˆϕ with their whitened counterparts Ex[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T]−1/2 ϕ and
Ex[ ˆϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]−1/2 ˆϕ in eqs. (5) to (7).
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
to align word embeddings from diﬀerent languages. Alignment between network weights
has also been considered in previous works, but it was restricted to permutation matrices
(Entezari et al., 2022; Benzing et al., 2022; Ainsworth et al., 2022). Permutations have the
advantage of commuting with pointwise non-linearities, and can therefore be introduced
while exactly preserving the network output function. However, they are not suﬃciently
rich to capture the variability of random features. It is shown in Entezari et al. (2022)
that the error after permutation alignment converges to zero with the number of random
features d1 at a polynomial rate which is cursed by the dimensiond0 of x. On the contrary,
the following theorem proves that the error after rotational alignment has a convergence
rate which is independent of the dimensiond0.
Theorem 1 Assume that Ex[∥x∥2] < +∞, σ is Lipschitz continuous, and π has ﬁnite
fourth order moments. Then there exists a constantc > 0 which does not depend ond0 nor
d1 such that
EW,x,x′
[
|ˆk(x, x′)− k(x, x′)|2]
≤ c d−1
1 ,
where x′ is an i.i.d. copy ofx. Suppose that the sorted eigenvaluesλ1≥···≥ λm≥···
of Ex[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T] satisfy λm = O(m−α) with α > 1. Then the alignment ˆA deﬁned in (5)
satisﬁes
EW,x
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥
2
H
]
≤ c d−η
1 with η = α− 1
2(2α− 1) > 0.
Finally, for any f(x) =⟨θ, ϕ(x)⟩H inH, if ˆθ = ˆATθ then
EW,x
[
| ˆf(x)− f(x)|2]
≤ c∥f∥2
H d−η
1 .
The proof is given in Appendix A. The convergence of the empirical kernelˆk to the
asymptotic kernel k is a direct application of the law of large numbers. The mean-square
distance (7) betweenˆA ˆϕ and ϕ is then rewritten as the Bures-Wasserstein distance (Bhatia
et al., 2019) between the kernel integral operators associated toˆk and k. It is controlled
by their mean-square distance via an entropic regularization of the underlying optimal
transport problem (Cuturi, 2013, see also Peyré and Cuturi, 2019). The convergence rate
is then obtained by exploiting the eigenvalue decay of the kernel integral operator.
Theorem 1 proves that there exists a rotationˆA which nearly aligns the hidden layer of
a random feature network with any feature vector of the asymptotic kernel, with an error
which converges to zero. The network output converges if that same rotation is applied on
the last layer weights. We will use this result in the next section to deﬁne deep rainbow
networks, but we note that it can be of independent interest in the analysis of random
feature representations. The theorem assumes a power-law decay of the covariance spectrum
of the feature vectorϕ (which is independent of the choice ofϕ satisfying eq. 4). Because∑∞
m=1 λm = Ex[∥ϕ(x)∥2] < +∞ (as shown in the proof), a standard result implies that
λm = o(m−1), so the assumptionα > 1 is not too restrictive. The constantc is explicit and
depends polynomially on the constants involved in the hypotheses (except for the exponent
α). The convergence rateη = α−1
2(2α−1) is an increasing function of the power-law exponent
α. It vanishes in the critical regime whenα→ 1, and increases to 1
4 when α→∞ . This
bound might be pessimistic in practice, as a heuristic argument suggests a rate of1
2 when
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
α→∞ based on the rate1 on the kernels. A comparison with convergence rates of random
features KPCA (Sriperumbudur and Sterge, 2022) indeed suggests it might be possible to
improve the convergence rate toα−1
2α−1. Finally, although we give results in expectation for
the sake of simplicity, we note that bounds in probability can be obtained using Bernstein
concentration bounds for operators (Tropp, 2012; Minsker, 2017) in the spirit of Rudi et al.
(2013); Bach (2017).
2.2 Deep rainbow networks
The previous section showed that the hidden layer of a random feature network converges
to an inﬁnite-dimensional feature vector, up to a rotation deﬁned by the alignmentˆA. This
section deﬁnes deep fully-connected rainbow networks by cascading conditional random
features, whose kernels also converge in the inﬁnite-width limit. It provides a model of the
joint probability distribution of weights of trained networks, whose layer dependencies are
captured by alignment rotation matrices.
We consider a deep fully-connected neural network withJ hidden layers, which itera-
tively transforms the input datax∈ Rd0 with weight matricesWj of size dj× dj−1 and a
pointwise non-linearity σ, to compute each activation layer of depthj:
ˆφj(x) = σWj··· σW1 x.
σ includes a division by
∑
dj, which we do not write explicitly to simplify notations. After
J non-linearities, the last layer outputs
ˆf(x) =⟨ˆθ, ˆφJ(x)⟩.
Inﬁnite-width rainbow networks. The rainbow model deﬁnes eachWj conditionally
on the previous(Wℓ)ℓ<j as a random feature matrix. The distribution of random features
at layer j is rotated to account for the random rotation introduced by ˆφj−1. We ﬁrst
introduce inﬁnite-width rainbow networks which deﬁne the asymptotic feature vectors used
to compute these rotations.
Deﬁnition 1 An inﬁnite-width rainbow network has activation layers deﬁned in a separable
Hilbert spaceHj for any j≤ J by
φj(x) = ϕj(ϕj−1(. . . ϕ1(x) . . .))∈ Hj for x∈ H0 = Rd0,
where each ϕj : Hj−1→ Hj is deﬁned from a probability distributionπj on Hj−1 by
⟨ϕj(z), ϕj(z′)⟩Hj
= Ew∼πj
[
σ(⟨w, z⟩Hj−1
) σ(⟨w, z′⟩Hj−1)
]
for z, z′∈ Hj−1. (8)
It deﬁnes a rainbow kernel
kj(x, x′) =⟨φj(x), φj(x′)⟩Hj
.
For θ∈ HJ, the inﬁnite-width rainbow network outputs
f(x) =⟨θ, φJ(x)⟩HJ
∈H J ,
whereHJ is the RKHS of the rainbow kernelkJ of the last layer. If all probability distribu-
tions πj are Gaussian, then the rainbow network is said to be Gaussian.
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Each activation layerφj(x)∈ Hj of an inﬁnite-width rainbow network has an inﬁnite
dimension and is deterministic. We shall see that the cascaded feature mapsϕj are inﬁnite-
width limits ofσWj up to rotations. One can arbitrarily rotate a feature vectorϕj(z) which
satisﬁes (8), which also rotates the Hilbert spaceHj and φj(x). If the distributionπj+1 at
the next layer (or the weight vectorθ if j = J) is similarly rotated, this operation preserves
the dot products⟨w, φj(x)⟩Hj for w∼ πj+1. It therefore does not aﬀect the asymptotic
rainbow kernels at each depthj:
kj(x, x′) = Ew∼πj
[
σ(
⟨
w, φj−1(x)
⟩
Hj−1
) σ(⟨w, φj−1(x′)⟩Hj−1)
]
, (9)
as well as the rainbow network output f(x). We shall ﬁx these rotations by choosing
KPCA feature vectors. This imposes that Hj = ℓ2(N) and Ex[φj(x) φj(x)T] is diagonal
with decreasing values along the diagonal. The random feature distributionsπj are thus
deﬁned with respect to the PCA basis ofφj(x). Inﬁnite-width rainbow networks are then
uniquely determined by the distributionsπj and the last-layer weightsθ.
The weight distributionsπj for j≥ 2 are deﬁned in the inﬁnite-dimensional spaceHj−1
andsomecaremustbetaken. Wesaythatadistribution π onaHilbertspace H hasbounded
second-order moments if its (uncentered) covariance operatorEw∼π[wwT] is bounded (for
the operator norm). The expectation is to be understood in a weak sense: we assume
that there exists a bounded operatorC on H such that zTCz′ = Ew∼π[⟨w, z⟩H⟨w, z′⟩H] for
z, z′∈ H. We further say that π has bounded fourth-order moments if for every trace-
class operator T (that is, such thattr(T TT)1/2 < +∞), Ew∼π[(wTT w)2] < +∞. We will
assume that the weight distributionsπj have bounded second- and fourth-order moments.
Together with our assumptions thatEx[∥x∥2] < +∞ and that σ is Lipschitz continuous,
this veriﬁes the existence of all the inﬁnite-dimensional objects we will use in the sequel. For
the sake of brevity, we shall not mention these veriﬁcations in the main text and defer them
to Appendix B. Finally, we note that we can generalize rainbow networks to cylindrical
measures πj, which deﬁne cylindrical random variablesw (Vakhania et al., 1987, see also
Riedle, 2011 or Gawarecki and Mandrekar, 2011, Section 2.1.1). Such cylindrical random
variables w are linear maps such thatw(z) is a real random variable for everyz∈ Hj−1.
w(z) cannot necessarily be written⟨w, z⟩ with a random w∈ Hj−1. We still write⟨w, z⟩
by abuse of notation, with the understanding that it refers tow(z). For example, we will
see that ﬁnite-width networks at initialization converge to inﬁnite-width rainbow networks
with πj =N (0, Id), which is a cylindrical measure but not a measure whenHj−1 is inﬁnite-
dimensional.
Dimensionality reduction. Empirical observations of trained deep networks show that
they have approximately low-rank weight matrices (Martin and Mahoney, 2021; Thamm
et al., 2022). They compute a dimensionality reduction of their input, which is character-
ized by the singular values of the layer weightWj, or equivalently the eigenvalues of the
empirical weight covarianced−1
j W T
j Wj. For rainbow networks, the uncentered covariances
Cj = Ew∼πj[wwT] of the weight distributionsπj therefore capture the linear dimensionality
reductions of the network. IfC1/2
j is the symmetric square root ofCj, we can rewrite (8)
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
with a change of variable as
ϕj(z) = ˜ϕj
(
C1/2
j z
)
with ⟨ ˜ϕj(z), ˜ϕj(z′)⟩Hj = Ew∼˜πj
[
σ(⟨w, z⟩) σ(⟨z, z′⟩)
]
,
where ˜πj has an identity covariance. Rainbow network activations can thus be written:
φj(x) = ˜ϕj
(
C1/2
j ··· ˜ϕ1(C1/2
1 x)
)
. (10)
Each square root C1/2
j performs a linear dimensionality reduction of its input, while the
white random feature maps ˜ϕj compute high-dimensional non-linear embeddings. Such
linear dimensionality reductions in-between kernel feature maps had been previously con-
sidered in previous works (Cho and Saul, 2009; Mairal, 2016; Bietti, 2019).
Gaussian rainbow networks. The distributions πj are entirely speciﬁed by their co-
variance Cj for Gaussian rainbow networks, where we then have
πj =N (0, Cj).
When the covarianceCj is not trace-class,πj is a cylindrical measure as explained above.
If σ is a homogeneous non-linearity such as ReLU, on can derive (Cho and Saul, 2009) from
(9) that Gaussian rainbow kernels can be written from a homogeneous dot-product:
kj(x, x′) =∥zj(x)∥∥ zj(x′)∥ κ
(
⟨zj(x), zj(x′)⟩
∥zj(x)∥∥ zj(x′)∥
(
with zj(x) = C1/2
j φj−1(x), (11)
where κ is a scalar function which depends on the non-linearityσ. The Gaussian rainbow
kernels kj and the rainbow RKHSHJ only depend on the covariances(Cj)j≤J. If Cj = Idfor
each j, thenkj remains a dot-product kernel because⟨zj(x), zj(x′)⟩ =⟨φj−1(x), φj−1(x′)⟩ =
kj−1(x, x′). If the norms
zj(x)
 concentrate, we then obtainkj(x, x′) = κ(. . . κ(⟨x, x′⟩) . . .)
(Daniely et al., 2016). Increasing depth then does not lead to better approximation prop-
erties3, as kj has the same expressivity as k1 (Bietti and Bach, 2021). When Cj ̸= Id,
Gaussian rainbow kernels kj cannot be written as a cascade of elementary kernels, but
their square roots φj are a cascade of kernel feature mapsϕℓ = ˜ϕℓ C1/2
ℓ for ℓ≤ j. The
white random feature maps˜ϕj have simple expressions as they arise from the homogeneous
dot-product kernel:
⟨ ˜ϕj(z), ˜ϕj(z′)⟩Hj =∥z∥∥ z′∥ κ
(
⟨z, z′⟩
∥z∥∥ z′∥
(
.
This dot-product kernel implies that ˜ϕj is equivariant to rotations, and hence symmetry
properties on the networkφj as we will see in Section 2.3.
3Though depth may still aﬀects the generalization properties by changing the spectral bias of the kernels
(Bordelon et al., 2020).
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Finite-width rainbow networks. We now go back to the general case of arbitrary
weight distributions πj and introduce ﬁnite-width rainbow networks, which are random
approximations of inﬁnite-width rainbow networks. Each weight matrixWj is iteratively
deﬁned conditionally on the previous weight matrices(Wℓ)ℓ<j. Its conditional probability
distribution is deﬁned in order to preserve the key induction property of the rainbow con-
vergence of the activationsˆφj. Informally, it states that ˆAj ˆφj≈ φj where ˆAj : Rdj→ Hj
is an alignment rotation. Finite-width rainbow networks impose suﬃcient conditions to
obtain this convergence at all layers, as we will show below.
The ﬁrst layer W1 is deﬁned as in Section 2.1. Suppose thatW1, . . . , Wj−1 have been
deﬁned. By induction, there exists an alignment rotationˆAj−1 : Rdj−1→ Hj−1, deﬁned by
ˆAj−1 = arg min
ˆA∈O(dj−1)
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆφj−1(x)− φj−1(x)∥
2
Hj−1
]
, (12)
such that ˆAj−1 ˆφj−1(x)≈ φj−1(x). We wish to deﬁneWj so that ˆAj ˆφj(x)≈ φj(x). This
can be achieved with a random feature approximation ofϕj composed with the alignment
ˆAj−1. Consider a (semi-inﬁnite) random matrix W′
j of dj i.i.d. rows in Hj−1 distributed
according to πj:
W′
j = (w′
ji)i≤dj with i.i.d. w′
ji∼ πj.
We then have ˆAj σ(W′
jx)≈ ϕj(x) for a suitably deﬁned ˆAj, as in Section 2.1. Combining
the two approximations, we obtain
ˆAj σ
(
W′
j ˆAj−1 ˆφj−1(x)
)
≈ ϕj
(
φj−1(x)
)
= φj(x).
We thus deﬁne the weight at layerj with the aligned random features
Wj = W′
j ˆAj−1.
It is a random weight matrix of sizedj× dj−1, with rotated rows ˆAT
j−1w′
ji that are inde-
pendent and identically distributed when conditioned on the previous layers(Wℓ)ℓ<j. This
inverse rotation of random weights cancels the rotation introduced by the random features
at the previous layer, and implies a convergence of the random features cascade as we will
prove below. This qualitative derivation motivates the following deﬁnition of ﬁnite-width
rainbow networks.
Deﬁnition 2 A ﬁnite-width rainbow network approximation of an inﬁnite-width rainbow
network with weight distributions (πj)j≤J is deﬁned for each j ≤ J by a random weight
matrix Wj of size dj× dj−1 which satisﬁes
Wj = ( ˆAT
j−1w′
ji)i≤dj with i.i.d. w′
ji∼ πj, (13)
where ˆAj−1 is the rotation deﬁned in (12). The last layer weight vector isˆθ = ˆAT
J θ where
θ is the last layer weight of the inﬁnite-width rainbow network.
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
The random weightsWj of a ﬁnite rainbow networks are deﬁned as rotations and ﬁnite-
dimensional projections of thedj inﬁnite-dimensional random vectorsw′
ji, which are inde-
pendent. The dependence on the previous layers(Wℓ)ℓ<j is captured by the rotationˆAj−1.
The rows ofWj are thus not independent, but they are independent when conditioned on
(Wℓ)ℓ<j.
The rotation and projection of the random weights (13) implies a similar rotation and
projection on the moments ofWj conditionally on (Wℓ)ℓ<j. In particular, the conditional
covariance ofWj is thus
ˆCj = ˆAT
j−1Cj ˆAj−1. (14)
Wj can then be factorized as the product of a white random feature matrix˜Wj with the
covariance square root:
Wj = ˜Wj ˆC1/2
j with i.i.d. ˜wji conditionally on (Wℓ)ℓ<j.
Note that the distribution of the white random features˜wji depends in general on ˆAj−1.
However, for Gaussian rainbow networks withπj =N (0, Cj), this dependence is limited to
the covariance ˆCj and ˜Wj = Gj is a Gaussian white matrix with i.i.d. normal entries that
are independent of the previous layer weights(Wℓ)ℓ<j:
Wj = Gj ˆC1/2
j with i.i.d. Gjik∼N (0, 1) . (15)
Finite-width Gaussian rainbow networks are approximation models of deep networks
that have been trained end-to-end by SGD on a supervised task. We will explain in Section 3
how each covariance Cj of the rainbow model can be estimated from the weights of one
or several trained networks. The precision of a Gaussian rainbow model is evaluated by
sampling new weights according to (15) and verifying that the resulting rainbow network
has a similar performance as the original trained networks.
Convergence to inﬁnite-width networks. The heuristic derivation used to motivate
Deﬁnition 2 suggests that the weights rotation (13) guarantees the convergence of ﬁnite-
width rainbow networks towards their inﬁnite-width counterpart. This is proved by the
next theorem, which builds on Theorem 1.
Theorem 2 Assume that Ex[∥x∥2] < +∞ and σ is Lipschitz continuous. Let (φj)j≤J be
the activation layer of an inﬁnite-width rainbow network with distributions(πj)j≤J with
bounded second- and fourth-order moments, and an outputf(x). Let (ˆφj)j≤J be the activa-
tion layers of sizes(dj)j≤J of a ﬁnite-width rainbow network approximation, with an output
ˆf(x). Let kj(x, x′) =⟨φj(x), φj(x′)⟩ and ˆkj(x, x′) =⟨ˆφj(x), ˆφj(x′)⟩. Suppose that the sorted
eigenvalues of Ex[φj(x) φj(x)T] satisfy λj,m = O(m−αj) with αj > 1. Then there exists
c > 0 which does not depend upon(dj)j≤J such that
EW1,...,Wj ,x,x′
[
|ˆkj(x, x′)− kj(x, x′)|2]
≤ c
(
εj−1 + d−1/2
j
)2
EW1,...,Wj ,x
[
∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥
2
Hj
]
≤ c ε2
j
EW1,...,WJ ,x
[
| ˆf(x)− f(x)|2]
≤ c∥f∥2
HJ
ε2
J ,
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
where
εj =
j∑
ℓ=1
d−ηℓ/2
ℓ with ηℓ = αℓ− 1
2(2αℓ− 1) > 0.
The proof is given in Appendix B. It applies iteratively Theorem 1 at each layer. As in
Theorem 1, the constantc is explicit and depends polynomially on the constants involved
in the hypotheses. For Gaussian weight distributions πj =N (0, Cj), the theorem only
requires that∥Cj∥∞ is ﬁnite for each j≤ J, where∥·∥∞ is the operator norm (i.e., the
largest eigenvalue).
This theorem proves that at each layer, a ﬁnite-width rainbow network has an empirical
kernel ˆkj which converges in mean-square to the deterministic kernelkj of the inﬁnite-width
network, when all widthsdℓ grow to inﬁnity. Similarly, after alignment, each activation layer
ˆφj also converges to the activation layerφj of the inﬁnite-width network. Finally, the ﬁnite-
width rainbow output ˆf converges to a functionf in the RKHSHJ of the inﬁnite-width
network. This demonstrates that all ﬁnite-width rainbow networks implement the same
deterministic function when they are wide enough. Note that any relative scaling between
the layer widths is allowed, as the error decomposes as a sum over layer contributions: each
layer converges independently. In particular, this includes the proportional case when the
widths are deﬁned asdj = s d0
j and the scaling factors grows to inﬁnity.
Theasymptoticexistenceofrotationsbetweenanytwotrainednetworkshasimplications
for the geometry of the loss landscape: if the weight distributionsπj are unimodal, which
is the case for Gaussian distributions, alignment rotations can be used to build continuous
paths in parameter space between the two rainbow network weights without encountering
loss barriers (Freeman and Bruna, 2017; Draxler et al., 2018; Garipov et al., 2018). This
could not be done with permutations, which are discrete symmetries. It proves that under
the rainbow assumptions, the loss landscape of wide-enough networks has a single connected
basin, as opposed to many isolated ones.
Theorem 2 is a law-of-large-numbers result, which is diﬀerent but complementary to
the central-limit neural network Gaussian process convergence of Neal (1996); Williams
(1996); Lee et al. (2018); Matthews et al. (2018). These works state that at initialization,
random ﬁnite-dimensional projections of the activationsˆφj converge to a random Gaussian
process described by a kernel. In contrast, we show in a wider setting that the activations
ˆφj converge to a deterministic feature vectorφj described by a more general kernel, up to
a random rotation. Note that this requires no assumptions of Gaussianity on the weights
or the activations. The convergence of the kernels is similar to the results of Daniely et al.
(2016), but here generalized to non-compositional kernels obtained with arbitrary weight
distributions πj.
Theorem 2 can be considered as a multi-layer but static extension of the mean-ﬁeld
limit of Chizat and Bach (2018); Mei et al. (2018); Rotskoﬀ and Vanden-Eijnden (2018);
Sirignano and Spiliopoulos (2020). The limit is the inﬁnite-width rainbow networks of
Deﬁnition 1. It diﬀers from other multi-layer extensions (Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2022;
E and Wojtowytsch, 2020; Nguyen and Pham, 2020; Chen et al., 2022; Yang and Hu, 2021;
Bordelon and Pehlevan, 2022) because Deﬁnition 2 includes the alignment rotationsˆAj. We
shall not model the optimization dynamics of rainbow networks when trained with SGD,
but we will make several empirical observations in Section 3.
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Finally, Theorem 2 shows that the two assumptions of Deﬁnition 2, namely that layer
dependencies are reduced to alignment rotations and that neuron weights are conditionally
i.i.d. at each layer, imply the convergence up to rotations of network activations at each
layer. We will verify numerically this convergence in Section 3 for several network archi-
tectures on image classiﬁcation tasks, corroborating the results of Raghu et al. (2017) and
Kornblith et al. (2019). It does not mean that the assumptions of Deﬁnition 2 are valid,
and verifying them is challenging in high-dimensions beyond the Gaussian case where the
weight distributionsπj are not known. We however note that the rainbow assumptions are
satisﬁed at initialization with πj =N (0, Id), as eq. (14) implies that ˆCj = Id and thus
that the weight matricesWj = Gj are independent. Theorem 2 therefore applies at ini-
tialization. It is an open problem to show whether the existence of alignment rotationsˆAj
is preserved during training by SGD, or whether dependencies between layer weights are
indeed reduced to these rotations. Regarding (conditional) independence between neuron
weights, Sirignano and Spiliopoulos (2020) show that in one-hidden-layer networks, neuron
weights remain independent at non-zero but ﬁnite training times in the inﬁnite-width limit.
In contrast, a result of Rotskoﬀ and Vanden-Eijnden (2018) suggests that this is no longer
true at diverging training times, as SGD leads to an approximation of the target function
f with a better rate than Monte-Carlo. Neuron weights at a given layer remain however
(conditionally) exchangeable due to the permutation equivariance of the initialization and
SGD, and therefore have the same marginal distribution. Theorem 2 can be extended to
dependent neuron weightsw′
ji, e.g., with the more general assumption that their empirical
distribution d−1
j
∑dj
i=1 δw′
ji
converges weakly toπj when the widthdj increases.
2.3 Symmetries and convolutional rainbow networks
The previous sections have deﬁned fully-connected rainbow networks. In applications, prior
information on the learning problem is often available. Practitioners then design more
constrained architectures which implement inductive biases. Convolutional networks are
important examples, which enforce two fundamental properties: equivariance to transla-
tions, achieved with weight sharing, and local receptive ﬁelds, achieved with small ﬁlter
supports (LeCun et al., 1989a; LeCun and Bengio, 1995). We ﬁrst explain how equivari-
ance to general groups may be achieved in rainbow networks. We then generalize rainbow
networks to convolutional architectures.
Equivariant rainbow networks. Prior information may be available in the form of a
symmetry group under which the desired output is invariant. For instance, translating an
image may not change its class. We now explain how to enforce symmetry properties in
rainbow networks by imposing these symmetries on the weight distributionsπj rather than
on the values of individual neuron weightswji. For Gaussian rainbow networks, we shall
see that it is suﬃcient to impose that the desired symmetries commute with the weight
covariances Cj.
Formally, let us consider G a subgroup of the orthogonal group O(d0), under whose
action the target functionf ⋆ is invariant: f ⋆(gx) = f ⋆(x) for all g∈ G. Such invariance
is generally achieved progressively through the network layers. In a convolutional network,
translation invariance is built up by successive pooling operations. The outputf(x) is in-
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
variant but intermediate activationsφj(x) are equivariant to the group action. Equivariance
is more general than invariance. The activation mapφ is equivariant if there is a represen-
tation ρ of G such that φ(gx) = ρ(g)φ(x), where ρ(g) is an invertible linear operator such
that ρ(gg′) = ρ(g)ρ(g′) for all g, g′∈ G. An invariant functionf(x) =⟨θ, φ(x)⟩ is obtained
from an equivariant activation mapφ with a ﬁxed pointθ of the representationρ. Indeed,
if ρ(g)Tθ = θ for all g∈ G, then f(gx) = f(x).
We say that ρ is an orthogonal representation ofG if ρ(g) is an orthogonal operator
for all g. When ρ is orthogonal, we say thatφ is orthogonally equivariant. We also say
that a distributionπ is invariant under the action ofρ if ρ(g)Tw∼ π for all g∈ G, where
w∼ π. We say that a linear operatorC commutes with ρ if it commutes with ρ(g) for
all g∈ G. Finally, a kernel k is invariant to the action ofG if k(gx, gx′) = k(x, x′). The
following theorem proves that rainbow kernels are invariant to a group action if each weight
distribution πj is invariant to the group representation on the activation layerφj−1, which
inductively deﬁnes orthogonal representationsρj at each layer.
Theorem 3 Let G be a subgroup of the orthogonal groupO(d0). If all weight distribution
(πj)j≤J are invariant to the inductively deﬁned orthogonal representation ofG on their
input activations, then activations(φj)j≤J are orthogonally equivariant to the action ofG,
and the rainbow kernels(kj)j≤J are invariant to the action ofG. For Gaussian rainbow
networks, this is equivalent to imposing that all weight covariances(Cj)j≤J commute with
the orthogonal representation ofG on their input activations.
The proof is in Appendix C. The result is proved by induction. Ifφj is orthogonally
equivariant and πj+1 is invariant to its representationρj, then the next-layer activations
are equivariant. Indeed, forw∼ πj+1,
σ
(]
w, φj(gx)
⟩)
= σ
(]
w, ρj(g)φj(x)
⟩)
= σ
(]
ρj(g)Tw, φj(x)
⟩)
∼ σ
(]
w, φj(x)
⟩)
,
which deﬁnes an orthogonal representation ρj+1 on φj+1. Note that any distribution πj
which is invariant to an orthogonal representationρj necessarily has a covarianceCj which
commutes with ρj. The converse is true whenπj is Gaussian, which shows that Gaussian
rainbow networks have a maximal number of symmetries among rainbow networks with
weight covariancesCj.
Together with Theorem 2, Theorem 3 implies that ﬁnite-width rainbow networks can
implement functions ˆf which are approximately invariant, in the sense that the mean-square
error EW1,...,WJ ,x[| ˆf(gx)− ˆf(x)|2] vanishes when the layer widths grow to inﬁnity, with the
same convergence rate as in Theorem 2. The activationsˆφj are approximately equivariant
in a similar sense. This gives a relatively easy procedure to deﬁne neural networks having
predeﬁned symmetries. The usual approach is to impose that each weight matrixWj is
permutation-equivariant to the representation of the group action on each activation layer
(Cohen and Welling, 2016; Kondor and Trivedi, 2018). This means thatWj is a group
convolution operator and hence that the rows ofWj are invariant by this group action. This
property requires weight-sharing or synchronization between weights of diﬀerent neurons,
which has been criticized as biologically implausible (Bartunov et al., 2018; Ott et al.,
2020; Pogodin et al., 2021). On the contrary, rainbow networks implement symmetries
by imposing that the neuron weights are independent samples of a distribution which is
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
invariant under the group action. The synchronization is thus only at a global, statistical
level. It also provides representations with the orthogonal group, which is much richer than
the permutation group, and hence increases expressivity. It comes however at the cost of
an approximate equivariance for ﬁnite layer widths.
Convolutional rainbow networks. Translation-equivariance could be achieved in a
fully-connected architecture by imposing stationary weight distributions πj. For Gaus-
sian rainbow networks, this means that weight covariancesCj commute with translations,
and are thus convolution operators. However, the weights then have a stationary Gaussian
distribution and therefore cannot have a localized support. This localization has to be en-
forced with the architecture, by constraining the connectivity of the network. We generalize
the rainbow construction to convolutional architectures, without necessarily imposing that
the weights are Gaussian. It is achieved by a factorization of the weight layers, so that iden-
tical random features embeddings are computed for each patch of the input. As a result,
all previous theoretical results carry over to the convolutional setting.
In convolutional networks, eachWj is a convolution operator which enforces both trans-
lation equivariance and locality. Typical architectures impose that convolutional ﬁlters have
a predeﬁned support with an output which may be subsampled. This architecture prior can
be written as a factorization of the weight matrix:
Wj = Lj Pj,
where Pj is a prior convolutional operator which only acts along space and is replicated over
channels (also known as depthwise convolution), whileLj is a learned pointwise (or1× 1)
convolution which only acts along channels and is replicated over space. This factorization
is always possible, and should not be confused with depthwise-separable convolutions (Sifre
and Mallat, 2013; Chollet, 2017).
Let us consider a convolutional operatorWj having a spatial support of sizes2
j, with
dj−1 input channels and dj output channels. The prior operator Pj then extracts dj−1
patches of size sj× sj at each spatial location and reshapes them as a channel vector of
size d′
j−1 = dj−1s2
j. Pj is ﬁxed during training and represents the architectural constraints
imposed by the convolutional layer. The learned operatorLj is then a1× 1 convolutional
operator, applied at each spatial location acrossd′
j−1 input channels to computedj output
channels. This factorization reshapes the convolution kernel ofWj of sizedj× dj−1× sj× sj
into a1× 1 convolution Lj with a kernel of sizedj× d′
j−1× 1× 1. Lj can then be thought
as a fully-connected operator over channels that is applied at every spatial location.
The choice of the prior operator Pj directly inﬂuences the learned operator Lj and
therefore the weight distributionsπj. Pj may thus be designed to achieve certain desired
properties on πj. For instance, the operatorPj may also specify predeﬁned ﬁlters, such as
wavelets in learned scattering networks (Zarka et al., 2021; Guth et al., 2022). In a learned
scattering network, Pj computes spatial convolutions and subsamplings, with q wavelet
ﬁlters having diﬀerent orientations and frequency selectivity. The learned convolutionLj
then has d′
j−1 = dj−1q input channels. This is further detailed in Appendix D, which
explains that one can reduce the size ofLj by imposing that it commutes withPj, which
amounts to factorizingWj = Pj Lj instead.
The rainbow construction of Section 2.2 has a straightforward extension to the convo-
lutional case, with a few adaptations. The activations layersˆφj−1 should be replaced with
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Pj ˆφj−1 and Wj with Lj, where it is understood that it represents a fully-connected matrix
acting along channels and replicated pointwise across space. Similarly, the weight covari-
ances Cj and its square rootsC1/2
j are 1× 1 convolutional operators which act along the
channels ofPj ˆφj−1, or equivalently are applied over patches ofˆφj−1. Finally, the alignments
ˆAj−1 are 1× 1 convolutions which therefore commute withPj as they act along diﬀerent
axes. One can thus still deﬁne ˆCj = ˆAT
j−1Cj ˆAj−1. Convolutional rainbow networks also
satisfy Theorems 1 to 3 with appropriate modiﬁcations.
We note that the expression of the rainbow kernel is diﬀerent for convolutional archi-
tectures. Equation (9) becomes
kj(x, x′) =
∑
u
Ew∼πj
[
σ
(⟨
w, Pjφj−1(x)[u]
⟩)
σ(⟨w, Pjφj−1(x′)[u]⟩)
]
,
where Pjφj−1(x)[u] is a patch ofφj−1(x) centered atu and whose spatial size is determined
by Pj. In the particular case whereπj is Gaussian with a covarianceCj, the dot-product
kernel in eq. (11) becomes
kj(x, x′) =
∑
u
∥zu(x)∥∥ zu(x′)∥ κ
(
⟨zu(x), zu(x′)⟩
∥zu(x)∥∥ zu(x′)∥
(
with zu(x) = C1/2
j Pjφj−1(x)[u],
The sum on the spatial locationu averages the local dot-product kernel values and deﬁnes
a translation-invariant kernel. Observe that it diﬀers from the fully-connected rainbow
kernel (11) with weight covariancesC′
j = P T
j CjPj, which is a global dot-product kernel
with a stationary covariance. Indeed, the corresponding fully-connected rainbow networks
have ﬁlters with global spatial support, while convolutional rainbow networks have localized
ﬁlters. The covariance structure of depthwise convolutional ﬁlters has been investigated by
Trockman et al. (2023).
The architecture plays an important role by modifying the kernel and hence the RKHS
HJ of the output (Daniely et al., 2016). Hierarchical convolutional kernels have been studied
by Mairal et al. (2014); Anselmi et al. (2015); Bietti (2019). Bietti and Mairal (2019) have
proved that functions inHJ are stable to the action of diﬀeomorphisms (Mallat, 2012) when
Pj also include a local averaging before the patch extraction. WhenCj = Id, such kernels
have been shown to eﬃciently approximate and learn local functions (Cagnetta et al., 2023).
In that case, deep kernels withJ > 1 hidden layers are not equivalent to shallow kernels
with J = 1 (Bietti and Bach, 2021).
3. Numerical results
In this section, we validate the rainbow model on several network architectures trained on
image classiﬁcation tasks and make several observations on the properties of the learned
weight covariancesCj. As our ﬁrst main result, we partially validate the rainbow model by
showing that network activations converge up to rotations when the layer widths increase
(Section 3.1). We then show in Section 3.2 that the empirical weight covariancesˆCj converge
up to rotations when the layer widths increase. Furthermore, the weight covariances are
typically low-rank and can be partially speciﬁed from the input activation covariances. Our
second main result, in Section 3.3, is that the Gaussian rainbow model applies to scattering
19


===== PAGE 20 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
networks trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Generating new weights from the estimated
covariances Cj leads to similar performance than SGD training when the network width is
large enough. We further show that SGD only updates the weight covariance during training
while preserving the white Gaussian initialization. It suggests a possible explanation for
the Gaussian rainbow model, though the Gaussian assumption seems too strong to hold for
more complex learning tasks for network widths used in practice.
3.1 Convergence of activations in the inﬁnite-width limit
We show that trained networks with diﬀerent initializations converge to the same function
whentheirwidthincreases. Moreprecisely, weshowthestrongerpropertythatateachlayer,
their activations converge after alignment to a ﬁxed deterministic limit when the width
increases. Trained networks thus share the convergence properties of rainbow networks
(Theorem 2). Section 3.3 will further show that scattering networks trained on CIFAR-10
indeed approximate Gaussian rainbow networks. In this case, the limit function is thus in
the Gaussian rainbow RKHS (Deﬁnition 1).
Architectures and tasks. In this paper, we consider two architectures, learned scatter-
ing networks (Zarka et al., 2021; Guth et al., 2022) and ResNets (He et al., 2016), trained
on two image classiﬁcation datasets, CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) and ImageNet (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015).
Scattering networks have ﬁxed spatial ﬁlters, so that their learned weights only operate
across channels. This structure reduces the learning problem to channel matrices and
plays a major role in the (conditional) Gaussianity of the learned weights, as we will see.
The networks haveJ hidden layers, with J = 7 on CIFAR-10 andJ = 10 on ImageNet.
Each layer can be written Wj = Lj Pj where Lj is a learned 1× 1 convolution, and Pj
is a convolution with predeﬁned complex wavelets. Pj convolves each of its dj−1 input
channels with5 diﬀerent wavelet ﬁlters (1 low-frequency ﬁlter and4 oriented high-frequency
wavelets), thus generatingd′
j−1 = 5dj−1 channels. We shall still denoteLj with Wj to keep
the notations of Section 2.2. The non-linearityσ is a complex modulus with skip-connection,
followed by a standardization (as computed by a batch-normalization). This architecture
is borrowed from Guth et al. (2022) and is further detailed in Appendix D.
Our scattering network reaches an accuracy of92% on the CIFAR-10 test set. As a
comparison, ResNet-20 (He et al., 2016) achieves91% accuracy, while most linear classiﬁ-
cation methods based on hierarchical convolutional kernels such as the scattering transform
or the neural tangent kernel reach less than83% accuracy (Mairal et al., 2014; Oyallon
and Mallat, 2015; Li et al., 2019). On the ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al., 2015),
learned scattering networks achieve89% top-5 accuracy (Zarka et al., 2021; Guth et al.,
2022), which is also the performance of ResNet-18 with single-crop testing.
We have made minor adjustments to the ResNet architecture for ease of analysis such
as removing bias parameters (at no cost in performance), as explained in Appendix D. It
can still be written Wj = Lj Pj where Pj is a patch extraction operator as explained in
Section 2.3, and the non-linearityσ is a ReLU.
Convergence of activations. We train several networks with a range of widths by si-
multaneously scaling the widths of all layers with a multiplicative factors varying over a
20


===== PAGE 21 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
100 101 102 103 104
ˆφj KPCA rank m
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
ˆφj KPCA eigenvalue
m□1
s = 2 □3 s = 2 0 s = 2 3
j = 4
100 101 102 103 104
φj KPCA rank m
10□4
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
φj KPCA eigenvalue
m□1
j = 1 j = 4 j = 7
Figure 2: Convergence of spectra of activationsˆφj of ﬁnite-width trained scattering networks to-
wards the feature vectorφj. The ﬁgure shows the covariance spectra of activationsˆφj
for a given layerj = 4 and various width scalings (left) and of the feature vectorφj for
the seven hidden layersj∈{ 1, . . . ,7} (right). The covariance spectrum is a power law
of index close to−1.
range of 26 = 64. We show that their activations ˆφj converge after alignment to a ﬁxed
deterministic limit φj when the width increases. The feature mapφj is approximated with
the activations of a large network withs = 23.
We begin illustrating the behavior of activation spectra as a function of our width-scaling
parameter s, for seven-hidden-layer trained scattering networks on CIFAR-10. In the left
panel of Figure 2, we show how activation spectra vary as a function ofs for the layer
j = 4 which has a behavior representative of all other layers. The spectra are obtained by
doing a PCA of the activationsˆφj(x), which corresponds to a KPCA of the inputx with
respect to the empirical kernelˆkj. The ˆφj covariance spectra for networks of various widths
overlap at lower KPCA ranks, suggesting well-estimated components, while the variance
then decays rapidly at higher ranks. Wider networks thus estimate a larger number of
principal components of the feature vectorφj. For the ﬁrst layerj = 1, this recovers the
random feature KPCA results of Sriperumbudur and Sterge (2022), but this convergence
is observed at all layers. The overall trend as a function ofs illustrates the inﬁnite-width
convergence. We also note that, as the width increases, the activation spectrum becomes
closer to a power-law distribution with a slope of−1. The right panel of the ﬁgure shows
that this type of decay with KPCA rankm is observed at all layers of the inﬁnite-width
network (φj)j≤J. Thepower-law spectral properties ofrandom feature activations havebeen
studied theoretically by Scetbon and Harchaoui (2021), and in connection with empirical
scaling laws (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020) by Spigler et al. (2020); Bordelon
et al. (2020); Maloney et al. (2022). Note that here we do not scale the dataset size nor
training hyperparameters such as the learning rate or batch size with the network width,
and a diﬀerent experimental setup would likely inﬂuence the inﬁnite-width limit (Yang
et al., 2022; Hoﬀmann et al., 2022).
We now directly measure the convergence of activations by evaluating the mean-square
distance after alignment Ex[∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]. The left panel of Figure 3 shows that
21


===== PAGE 22 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
2□3 2□2 2□1 20 21 22
Width scaling
10□1
100
Mean-square alignment error
Scattering-7 on CIF AR-10
2□3 2□2 2□1 20 21 22
Width scaling
10□1
100
Mean-square alignment error
ResNet-18 on ImageNet
First
Last
Layer j
Figure 3: Convergence of activations ˆφj of ﬁnite-width networks towards the corresponding
feature vector φj, for scattering networks trained on CIFAR-10 ( left) and ResNet
trained on ImageNet ( right). Both panels show the relative mean squared error
Ex[∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]/Ex[∥φj(x)∥2] between aligned activations ˆAj ˆφj and the feature
vector φj. The error decreases as a function of the width scalings for all layers for the
scattering network, and all but the last few layers for ResNet.
it does indeed decrease when the network width increases, for all layersj. Despite the
theoretical convergence rate of Theorem 2 vanishing when the activation spectrum exponent
αj approaches 1, in practice we still observe convergence. Alignment rotations ˆAj are
computed on the train set while the mean-square distance is computed on the test set,
so this decrease is not a result of overﬁtting. It demonstrates that scattering networks
ˆφj approximate the same deterministic networkφj no matter their initialization or width
when it is large enough. The right panel of the ﬁgure evaluates this same convergence on
a ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet. The mean-square distance after alignment decreases
for most layers when the width increases. We note that the rate of decrease slows down
for the last few layers. For these layers, the relative error after alignment is of the order
of unity, indicating that the convergence is not observed at the largest width considered
here. The overall trend however suggests that further increasing the width would reduce the
error after alignment. The observations that networks trained from diﬀerent initializations
have similar activations had already been made by Raghu et al. (2017). Kornblith et al.
(2019) showed that similarity increases with width, but with a weaker similarity measure.
Rainbow networks, which we will show can approximate scattering networks, explain the
source of these observations as a consequence of the law of large numbers applied to the
random weight matrices with conditionally i.i.d. rows.
3.2 Properties of learned weight covariances
We have established the convergence (up to rotations) of the activationsˆφj in the inﬁnite-
width limit. Under the rainbow model, the weight matrices Wj are random and thus
cannot converge. However, they deﬁne estimates ˜Cj of the inﬁnite-dimensional weight
covariances Cj. We show that these estimates ˜Cj converge to the true covariances Cj
when the width increases. We then demonstrate that the covariances Cj are eﬀectively
22


===== PAGE 23 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
low-rank, and that their eigenspaces can be eﬃciently approximated by taking into account
unsupervised information. The weight covariances are thus of low complexity, in the sense
that they can be described with a number of parameters signiﬁcantly smaller than their
original size.
Estimation of the weight covariances. We estimate the weight covariancesCj from
the learned weights of a deep network. This network has weight matricesWj of sizedj×dj−1
that have been trained end-to-end by SGD. The natural empirical estimate of the weight
covariance ˆCj of Wj is
ˆCj≈ d−1
j W T
j Wj. (16)
It computes ˆCj from dj samples, which are conditionally i.i.d. under the rainbow model
hypothesis. Although the numberdj of samples is large, their dimensiondj−1 is also large.
For many architecturesdj/dj−1 remains nearly constant and we shall consider in this section
that dj = s d0
j, so that when the scaling factors grows to inﬁnity dj/dj−1 converges to a
non-zero ﬁnite limit. This creates challenges in the estimation ofˆCj, as we now explain. We
will see that the weight variance is ampliﬁed during training. The learned covariance can
thus be modeledˆCj = Id + ˆC′
j, where the magnitude ofˆC′
j keeps increasing during training.
When the training time goes to inﬁnity, the initializationId becomes negligible with respect
to ˆC′
j. However, at ﬁnite training time, only the eigenvectors ofC′
j with suﬃciently high
eigenvalues have been learned consistently, andˆC′
j is thus eﬀectively low-rank.ˆCj is then a
spiked covariance matrix (Johnstone, 2001). A large statistical literature has addressed the
estimation of spiked covariances when the number of parametersdj−1 and the number of
observations dj increases, with a constant ratiodj/dj−1 (Baik et al., 2005; El Karoui, 2008a).
Consistent estimators of the eigenvalues ofˆCj can be computed, but not of its eigenvectors,
unless we have other prior information such as sparsity of the covariance entries (El Karoui,
2008b) or its eigenvectors (Ma, 2013). In our setting, we shall see that prior information
on eigenspaces of ˆCj is available from the eigenspaces of the input activation covariances.
We use the empirical estimator (16) for simplicity, but it is not optimal. Minimax-optimal
estimators are obtained by shrinking empirical eigenvalues (Donoho et al., 2018).
We would like to estimate the inﬁnite-dimensional covariancesCj rather than ﬁnite-
dimensional projections ˆCj. Since ˆCj = ˆAT
j−1Cj ˆAj−1, an empirical estimate ofCj is given
by
˜Cj = ˆAj−1 ˆCj ˆAT
j−1. (17)
To compute the alignment rotationˆAj−1 with eq. (6), we must estimate the inﬁnite-width
rainbow activations φj−1. As above, we approximate φj−1 with the activations ˆφj−1 of a
ﬁnite but suﬃciently large network, relying on the activation convergence demonstrated
in the previous section. We then estimate Cj with eq. (17) and ˆCj ≈ d−1
j W T
j Wj. We
further reduce the estimation error ofCj by training several networks of size(dj)j≤J, and
by averaging the empirical estimators (17). Note that averaging directly the estimates (16)
of ˆCj with diﬀerent networks would not lead to an estimate ofCj, because the covariances
ˆCj are represented in diﬀerent bases which must be aligned. The ﬁnal layer weightsθ are
also similarly computed with an empirical estimator from the trained weightsˆθ.
23


===== PAGE 24 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
1 50 100 150 200 250 300
˜Cj PCA rank
10□1
100
101
102
˜Cj PCA eigenvalue
N = 1 network
N = 10 networks
N = 50 networks
1 50 100 150 200 250 300
˜Cj PCA rank
10□1
100
101
102
˜Cj PCA eigenvalue
s = 2 □3 s = 2 1
s = 2 5
1 50 100 150 200 250 300
˜Cj PCA maximum rank
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%CIF AR-10 Top-1 accuracy
+5% oﬀset
-5% oﬀset
2□3 2□2 2□1 20 21 22 23 24
Width scaling s
10□1
100
Cj estimation error
j = 2
j = 3
Figure 4: The weight covariance estimate˜Cj converges towards the inﬁnite-dimensional covariance
Cj for a three-hidden-layer scattering network trained on CIFAR-10. The ﬁrst three
panels show the behavior of the layerj = 2. Upper left: spectra of empirical weight
covariances ˜Cj as a function of the network sample sizeN showing the transition from
an exponential decay (ﬁtted by the dashed line forN = 1) to the Marchenko-Pastur
spectrum (ﬁtted by the dotted lines). Lower left: test classiﬁcation performance on
CIFAR-10 of the trained networks as a function of the maximum rank of its weight
covariance ˜Cj. Most of the performance is captured with the ﬁrst eigenvectors of˜Cj.
The curves for diﬀerent network sample sizesN when estimating ˜Cj overlap and are
oﬀset for visual purposes.Upper right: spectrum of empirical weight covariances˜Cj as
a function of the network width scalings. The dashed line is a ﬁt to an exponential
decay at low rank.Lower right: relative distance between empirical and true covariances
∥ ˆCj− Cj∥∞/∥Cj∥∞, as a function of the width scalings.
Convergence of weight covariances. We now show numerically that the weight co-
variance estimates ˜Cj (17) converge to the true covariancesCj. This performs a partial
validation of the rainbow assumptions of Deﬁnition 2, as it veriﬁes the rotation of the
second-order moments ofπj (14) but not higher-moments nor independence between neu-
rons. Due to computational limitations, we perform this veriﬁcation on three-hidden-layer
scattering networks trained on CIFAR-10, for which we can scale both the number of net-
works N we can average over, and their widths. The main computational bottleneck here
is the singular value decomposition of the cross-covariance matrixEx[φj(x) ˆφj(x)T] to com-
24


===== PAGE 25 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
pute the alignment ˆAj, which requiresO(N s3) time and O(N s2) memory. These shallower
networks reach a test accuracy of84% at large width.
We begin by showing that empirical covariance matrices˜Cj estimated from the weights
of diﬀerent networks share the same eigenspaces of large eigenvalues. To this end, we train
N networks of the same ﬁnite width (s = 1) and compare the covariances˜Cj estimated from
these N networks as a function ofN. As introduced above, the estimated covariances˜Cj
are well modeled with a spiked-covariance model. The upper-left panel of Figure 4 indeed
shows that the covariance spectrum interpolates between an exponential decay at low ranks
(indicated by the dashed line, corresponding to the “spikes” resulting from training, as will
be shown in Section 3.3), and a Marchenko-Pastur tail at higher ranks (indicated by dotted
lines, corresponding to the initialization with identity covariance). Note that we show the
eigenvalues as a function of their rank rather than a spectral density in order to reveal the
exponential decay of the spike positions with rank, which was missed in previous works
(Martin and Mahoney, 2021; Thamm et al., 2022). The exponential regime is present even
in the covariance estimated from a single network, indicating its stability across training
runs, while the Marchenko-Pastur tail becomes ﬂatter as more samples are used to estimate
the empirical covariance. Here, the feature vectorφj has been estimated with a scattering
network of same widths = 1 for simplicity of illustration.
As shown in the lower-left panel, only the exponential regime contributes to the classi-
ﬁcation accuracy of the network: the neuron weights can be projected on the ﬁrst principal
components of ˜Cj, which correspond to the learned spikes, without harming performance.
The informative component of the weights is thus much lower-dimensional (≈ 30) than
the network width (128), and this dimension appears to match the characteristic scale of
the exponential decay of the covariance eigenvalues. The numberN of trained networks
used to compute ˜Cj has no appreciable eﬀect on the approximation accuracy, which again
shows that the empirical covariance matrices of allN networks share this common infor-
mative component. This presence of a low-dimensional informative weight component is
in agreement with the observation that the Hessian of the loss at the end of training is
dominated by a subset of its eigenvectors (LeCun et al., 1989b; Hassibi and Stork, 1992).
These Hessian eigenvectors could indeed be related to the weight covariance eigenvectors.
Similarly, the dichotomy in weight properties highlighted by our analysis could indicate why
the eigenvalue distribution of the loss Hessian separates into two distinct regimes (Sagun
et al., 2016, 2017; Papyan, 2019): the “bulk” (with small eigenvalues corresponding to un-
informative ﬂat directions of the loss landscape) is related to the Marchenko-Pastur tail of
our weight covariance spectrum and the “top” (or spiked) components correspond to the
exponential regime found at the lowest ranks of the covariance spectrum.
We now demonstrate that the weight covariances˜Cj converge to an inﬁnite-dimensional
covarianceoperator Cj whenthewidthsofthescatteringnetworksincrease. Here, theweight
covariances ˜Cj are estimated from the weights ofN = 10 networks with the same width
scaling s, and we estimateCj from the weights ofN = 10 wide scattering networks with
s = 25. We ﬁrst illustrate this convergence on the spectrum of˜Cj in the upper-right panel of
Figure 2. The entire spectrum of˜Cj converges to a limiting spectrum which contains both
the informative exponential part resulting from training and the uninformative Marchenko-
Pastur tail coming from the initialization. The characteristic scale of the exponential regime
grows with network width but converges to a ﬁnite value as the width increases to inﬁnity.
25


===== PAGE 26 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
We then conﬁrm that the estimated covariances˜Cj indeed converge to the covarianceCj
when the width increases in the lower-right panel. The distance converges to zero as a
power law of the width scaling. The ﬁrst layerj = 1 has a diﬀerent convergence behavior
(not shown) as its input dimension does not increase withs.
In summary, in the context considered here, networks trained from diﬀerent initial-
izations share the same informative weight subspaces (after alignment) described by the
weight covariances at each layer, and they converge to a deterministic limit when the width
increases. The following paragraphs then demonstrate several properties of the weight co-
variances.
Dimensionality reduction in deep networks.We now consider deeper networks and
show that they also learn low-rank covariances. Comparing the spectra of weights and
activations reveals the alternation between dimensionality reduction with the “colored”
weight covariancesCj and high-dimensional embeddings with the “white” random features
which are captured in the rainbow model. We do so with two architectures: a ten-hidden-
layer scattering network and a slightly modiﬁed ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet (speciﬁed
in Appendix D), which both reach89% top-5 test accuracy.
We show the spectra of covariances of activationsφj in the left panels of Figure 5 and
of the weight covariancesCj in the right panels. For both networks, we recover the trend
that activation spectra are close to power laws of slope−1 and the weight spectra show
a transition from a learned exponential regime to a decay consistent with the Marchenko-
Pastur expectation, which is almost absent for ResNet-18. Considering them in sequence, as
a function of depth, the input activations are thus high-dimensional (due to the power-law
of index close to−1) while the subsequent weights perform a dimensionality reduction using
an exponential bottleneck with a characteristic scale much smaller than the width. Next,
the dimensionality is re-expanded with the non-linearity, as the activations at the next layer
again have a power-law covariance spectrum. Considering the weight spectra, we observe
that the eﬀective exponential scale increases with depth, from about10 to 60 for both the
scattering network and the ResNet. This increase of dimensionality with depth is expected:
in convolutional architectures, the weight covariancesCj are only deﬁned on small patches
of activations φj−1 because of the prior operatorPj. However, these patches correspond
to a larger receptive ﬁeld in the input imagex as the depth j increases. The rank of the
covariances is thus to be compared with the size of this receptive ﬁeld. Deep convolutional
networks thus implement a sequence of dimensionality contractions (with the learned weight
covariances) and expansions (with the white random features and non-linearity).
The successive increases and decreases in dimensionality due to the weights and non-
linearity across deep network layers have been observed by Recanatesi et al. (2019) with a
diﬀerent dimensionality measure. The observation that weight matrices of trained networks
are low-rank has been made in several works which exploited it for model compression (Denil
et al., 2013; Denton et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2017), while the high-dimensional embedding
property of random feature maps is well-known via the connection to their kernel (Rahimi
and Recht, 2007; Scetbon and Harchaoui, 2021). The rainbow model integrates these two
properties. In neuroscience, high-dimensional representations with power-law spectra have
been measured in the mouse visual cortex by Stringer et al. (2019). Such representations
in deep networks have been demonstrated to lead to increased predictive power of human
26


===== PAGE 27 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
100 101 102 103
φj KPCA rank m
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
φj KPCA eigenvalue
1 100 200 300 400 500
Cj PCA rank r
10□1
100
101
Cj PCA eigenvalue
100 101 102 103
φj KPCA rank m
10□2
10□1
100
101
102
103
φj KPCA eigenvalue
1 100 200 300 400 500
Cj PCA rank r
10□1
100
101
Cj PCA eigenvalue
First
Last
Layer j
Scattering-11 (89% ImageNet Top-5 accuracy)
ResNet-18 (89% ImageNet Top-5 accuracy)
Figure 5: Covariance spectra of activations and weights of an ten-hidden-layer scattering network
(top) and ResNet-18 (bottom) trained on ImageNet. In both cases, activation spectra
(left) mainly follow power-law distribution with index roughly−1. Weight spectra (right)
show a transition from an exponential decay with a characteristic scale increasing with
depth to the Marchenko-Pastur spectral distribution. These behaviors are captured by
the rainbow model. For visual purposes, activation and weight spectra are oﬀset by
a factor depending on j. In addition, we do not show the ﬁrst layer nor the 1× 1
convolutional residual branches in ResNet as they have diﬀerent layer properties.
fMRI cortical responses (Elmoznino and Bonner, 2022) and generalization in self-supervised
learning (Agrawal et al., 2022).
Unsupervised approximations of weight covariances. The learning complexity of
a rainbow network depends upon the number of parameters needed to specify the weight
covariances (Cj)j≤J toreachagivenperformance. Afterhavingshownthattheirinformative
subspace is of dimension signiﬁcantly lower than the network width, we now show that this
subspace can be eﬃciently approximated by taking into account unsupervised information
(that is, information about the distribution of the inputx but not the target outputy).
We would like to deﬁne a representation of the weight covariancesCj which can be
accurately approximated with a limited number of parameters. We chose to represent
the inﬁnite-width activations φj as KPCA feature vectors, whose uncentered covariances
Ex[φj(x) φj(x)T] are diagonal. In that case, the weight covariancesCj for j > 1 are oper-
ators deﬁned on Hj−1 = ℓ2(N). It amounts to representing Cj relatively to the principal
components of φj−1, or equivalently, the kernel principal components ofx with respect to
27


===== PAGE 28 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Explained variance
j = 2 j = 4 j = 6
0 100 200 300
Maximum rank
20%
40%
60%
80%CIF AR-10 Top-1 accuracy
0 500 1000
Maximum rank
0 1000 2000
Maximum rank
Cj PCA
φj□1 KPCA
Random basis
Figure 6: Unsupervised information deﬁnes low-dimensional approximations of the learned weight
covariances. Each column shows a diﬀerent layer j = 2 , 4, 6 of a seven-hidden-layer
scattering network trained on CIFAR-10. For each r, we consider projections of the
network weights on the ﬁrstr principal components of the weight covariances (red), the
kernel principal components of the input activations (orange), or random orthogonal
vectors (green).Top: weight variance explained by the ﬁrstr basis vectors as a function
of r. Bottom: classiﬁcation accuracy after projection of thej-th layer weights on the ﬁrst
r basis vectors, as function ofr.
kj−1. This deﬁnes unsupervised approximations of the weight covarianceCj by considering
its projection on these ﬁrst principal components. We now evaluate the quality of this
approximation.
Here, we consider a seven-hidden-layer scattering network trained on CIFAR-10, and
weight covariances estimated from N = 50 same-width networks. The upper panels of
Figure 6 shows the amount of variance inCj captured by the ﬁrstm basis directions as a
function of m, for three diﬀerent orthogonal bases. The speed of growth of this variance as
a function ofm deﬁnes the quality of the approximation: a faster growth indicates that the
basis provides an eﬃcient low-dimensional approximation of the covariance. The PCA basis
of Cj provides optimal such approximations, but it is not known before supervised training.
In contrast, the KPCA basis is computed from the previous layer activationsφj−1 without
28


===== PAGE 29 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
the supervision of class label information. This corresponds to an “unsupervised” rainbow
network which can be deﬁned iteratively by approximatingC1 with the covariance of x,
which deﬁnes a random feature representationφ1(x), and then approximatingC2 with the
covariance of φ1(x), etc. Figure 6 demonstrates that theφj−1 KPCA basis provides close
to optimal approximations ofCj. This approximation is more eﬀective for earlier layers,
indicating that the supervised information becomes more important for the deeper layers.
The lower panels of Figure 6 show a similar phenomenon when measuring classiﬁcation
accuracy instead of weight variance.
In summary, the learned weight matrices are low-rank, and a low-dimensional bottleneck
can be introduced without harming performance. Further, unsupervised information (in the
form of a KPCA) gives substantial prior information on this bottleneck: high-variance com-
ponents of the weights are correlated with high-variance components of the activations. This
observation was indirectly made by Raghu et al. (2017), who showed that network activa-
tions can be projected on stable subspaces, which are in fact aligned with the high-variance
kernel principal components. It demonstrates the importance of self-supervised learning
within supervised learning tasks (Bengio, 2012), and corroborates the empirical success of
self-supervised pre-training for many supervised tasks. The eﬀective number of parame-
ters that need to be learned in a supervised manner is thus much smaller than the total
number of trainable parameters. It has recently been shown that better approximations of
the weight covariances can be obtained by using supervised information, in the form of the
covariance of function gradients (Radhakrishnan et al., 2024).
3.3 Gaussian rainbow approximations
We now show that the Gaussian rainbow model applies to scattering networks trained on
the CIFAR-10 dataset, by exploiting the ﬁxed wavelet spatial ﬁlters incorporated in the
architecture. The Gaussian assumption thus only applies to weights along channels. We
make use of the factorizationWj = Gj ˆC1/2
j (15) of trained weights, whereˆCj results from
an estimation of Cj from several trained networks. We ﬁrst show that the distribution of
Gj can be approximated with random matrices of i.i.d. normal coeﬃcients. We then show
that Gaussian rainbow networks, which replace Gj with such a white Gaussian matrix,
achieve similar classiﬁcation accuracy as trained networks when the width is large. Finally,
we show that in the same context, the SGD training dynamics of the weight matricesWj
are characterized by the evolution of the weight covariancesˆCj only, whileGj remains close
to its initial value. The Gaussian approximation deteriorates at small widths or on more
complex datasets, suggesting that its validity regime is when the network width is large
compared to the task complexity.
ComparisonbetweentrainedweightsandGaussianmatrices. Weshowthatstatis-
tics of trained weights are reasonably well approximated by the Gaussian rainbow model.
To do so, we train N = 50 seven-hidden-layer scattering networks and estimate weight
covariances (Cj)j≤J by averaging eq. (17) over the trained networks as explained in Sec-
tion 3.2. We then retrieveGj = Wj ˆC−1/2
j with ˆCj = ˆAT
j Cj ˆAj as in eq. (14). Note that we
use a single covarianceCj to whiten the weights of allN networks: this will conﬁrm that
the covariances of weights of diﬀerent networks are indeed related through rotations, as was
29


===== PAGE 30 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
r = 1
j = 2 j = 4 j = 6
r = 10
r = 100
Figure 7: Marginal distributions of the weights ofN = 50 seven-hidden-layer scattering networks
trained on CIFAR-10. The weights at the j-th layer (wji)i≤dj of the N networks are
projected along the r-th eigenvector of Cj and normalized by the square root of the
corresponding eigenvalue. The distribution of theN dj projections (blue histograms) is
approximately normal (red curves). Each column shows a diﬀerent layerj, and each row
shows a diﬀerent rankr.
shown in Section 3.2 through the convergence of weight covariance estimates. The rainbow
feature vectors(φj)j≤J at each layer are approximated with the activations of one of theN
networks.
As a ﬁrst (partial) Gaussianity test, we compare marginal distributions of whitened
weights Gj with the expected normal distribution in Figure 7. We present results for a
series of layers (j = 2, 4, 6) across the network. Other layers present similar results, except
for j = 1 which has more signiﬁcant deviations from Gaussianity (not shown), as its input
dimension is constrained by the data dimension. We shall however not focus on this ﬁrst
layer as we will see that it can still be replaced by Gaussian realizations when generating
new weights. The weights at the j-th layer (wji)i≤dj of the N networks are projected
along the r-th eigenvector of Cj and normalized by the square root of the corresponding
eigenvalue. This global view shows that speciﬁc one-dimensional marginals are reasonably
well approximated by a normal distribution. We purposefully remain not quantitative, as
the goal is not to demonstrate that trained weights are statistically indistinguishable from
Gaussian realizations (which is false), but to argue that the latter is an acceptable model
for the former.
To go beyond one-dimensional marginals, we now compare in the bottom panels of
Figure 8 the spectral density of the whitened weightsGj to the theoretical Marchenko-
Pastur distribution (Marčenko and Pastur, 1967), which describes the limiting spectral
density of matrices with i.i.d. normal entries. We note a good agreement for the earlier
30


===== PAGE 31 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
j = 2
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
j = 4
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
j = 6
Wj
MP
0 5 10 15 20
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0 10 20
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0 10 20 30 40
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
 Gj
MP
Figure 8: Spectral density of empirical covariances of trained (top) and whitened weights (bottom).
Eigenvalues outside the support of the Marchenko-Pastur distribution (shown in red) are
indicated with spikes of amplitude proportional to their bin count. After whitening, the
number of outliers are respectively2%, 4%, and 8% for the layersj = 2, 4, and 6.
layers, which deteriorates for deeper layers (as well as the ﬁrst layer, not shown, which again
has a diﬀerent behavior). Importantly, the proportion of eigenvalues outside the Marchenko-
Pastur support is arguably negligible (< 10% at all layers), which is not the case for the
non-whitened weightsWj (upper panels) where it can be> 25% for j = 6. As observed by
MartinandMahoney(2021)andThammetal.(2022), trainedweightshavenon-Marchenko-
Pastur spectral statistics. Our results show that these deviations are primarily attributable
to correlations introduced by the non-identity covariance matricesCj, as opposed to power-
law distributions as hypothesized by Martin and Mahoney (2021). We however note that
due to the universality of the Marchenko-Pastur distribution, even a perfect agreement is
not suﬃcient to claim that trained networks have conditionally Gaussian weights. It merely
implies that the Gaussian rainbow model provides a satisfactory description of a number
of weight statistical properties. Despite the observed deviations from Gaussianity at later
layers, we now show that generating new Gaussian weights at all layers simultaneously
preserves most of the classiﬁcation accuracy of the network.
Performance of Gaussian rainbow networks. While the above tests indicate some
level of validation that the whitened weightsGj are matrices with approximately i.i.d. nor-
mal entries, it is not statistically feasible to demonstrate that this property is fully satisﬁed
in high-dimensions. We thus sample network weights from the Gaussian rainbow model
and verify that most of the performance can be recovered. This is done with the procedure
described in Deﬁnition 2, using the covariancesCj, rainbow activationsφj and ﬁnal layer
weights θ here estimated from a single trained network (having shown in Sections 3.1 and 3.2
31


===== PAGE 32 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
2□3 2□2 2□1 20 21 22
Width scaling
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%CIF AR-10 Top-1 accuracy
Trained
Rainbow + trained classiﬁer
Rainbow
Figure 9: Performance of seven-hidden-layer scattering networks on CIFAR-10 as a function of
network width for a trained network (blue), its rainbow network approximation with and
without classiﬁer retraining (red solid and dashed). The larger the width, the better the
sampled rainbow model approximates the original network.
that all networks deﬁne similar rainbow parameters if they are wide enough). New weights
Wj are sampled iteratively starting from the ﬁrst layer with a covarianceˆCj = ˆAT
j−1Cj ˆAj−1,
after computing the alignment rotation ˆAj−1 between the activations ˆφj−1(x) of the par-
tially sampled network and the activationsφj−1(x) of the trained network. The alignment
rotations are computed using the CIFAR-10 train set, while network accuracy is evaluated
on the test set, so that the measured performance is not a result of overﬁtting.
We perform this test using a series of seven-hidden-layer scattering networks trained
on CIFAR-10 with various width scalings. We present results in Figure 9 for two sets of
Gaussian rainbow networks: a ﬁrst set for which both the convolutional layers and the ﬁnal
layer are sampled from the rainbow model (which corresponds to aligning the classiﬁer of
the trained model to the sampled activationsˆφJ(x)), and another set for which we retrain
the classiﬁer after sampling the convolutional layers (which preserves the Gaussian rainbow
RKHS). We observe that the larger the network, the better it can be approximated by
a Gaussian rainbow model. At the largest width considered here, the Gaussian rainbow
network achieves 85% accuracy and 89% with a retrained classiﬁer, and recovers most of
the performance of the trained network which reaches92% accuracy. This performance is
non-trivial, as it is beyond most methods based on non-learned hierarchical convolutional
kernels which obtain less than 83% accuracy (Mairal et al., 2014; Oyallon and Mallat,
2015; Li et al., 2019). This demonstrates the importance of the learned weight covariances
Cj, as has been observed by Pandey et al. (2022) for modeling sensory neuron receptive
ﬁelds. It also demonstrates that the covariancesCj are suﬃciently well-estimated from a
single network to preserve classiﬁcation accuracy. We note however that Shankar et al.
(2020) achieve a classiﬁcation accuracy of 90% with a non-trained kernel corresponding
to an inﬁnite-width convolutional network, and Thiry et al. (2021) with a data-dependent
convolutional kernel.
32


===== PAGE 33 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
A consequence of our results is that these trained scattering networks have rotation
invariant non-linearities, in the sense that the non-linearity can be applied in random direc-
tions, provided that the next layer is properly aligned. This comes in contrast to the idea
that neuron weights individually converge to salient features of the input data. For large
enough networks, the relevant information learned at the end of training is therefore not
carried by individual neurons but encoded through the weight covariancesCj.
For smaller networks, the covariance-encoding property no longer holds, as Figure 9
suggests that trained weights becomes non-Gaussian. Networks trained on more complex
tasks might require larger widths for the Gaussian rainbow approximation to be valid. We
have repeated the analysis on scattering networks trained on the ImageNet dataset (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015), which reveals that the Gaussian rainbow approximation considered
here is inadequate at widths used in practice. This is corroborated by many empirical
observations of (occasional) semantic specialization in deep networks trained on ImageNet
(Olah et al., 2017; Bau et al., 2020; Dobs et al., 2022). A promising direction is to consider
Gaussian mixture rainbow models, as used by Dubreuil et al. (2022) to model the weights
of linear RNNs. Finally, we note that the Gaussian approximation also critically rely on
the ﬁxed wavelet spatial ﬁlters of scattering networks. Indeed, the spatial ﬁlters learned
by standard CNNs display frequency and orientation selectivity (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)
which cannot be achieved with a single Gaussian distribution, and thus require adapted
weight distributions πj to be captured in a rainbow model.
Training dynamics. The rainbow model is a static model, which does not characterize
the evolution of weights from their initialization during training. We now describe the
SGD training dynamics of the seven-hidden-layer scattering network trained on CIFAR-10
considered above. This dynamic picture provides an empirical explanation for the validity
of the Gaussian rainbow approximation.
We focus on the j-th layer weight matrix Wj(t) as the training time t evolves. To
measure its evolution, we consider its projection along the principal components of the ﬁnal
learned covariance ˆCj. More precisely, we project thedj neuron weights wji(t), which are
the rows ofWj(t), in the direction of ther-th principal axisejr of ˆCj. This gives a vector
ur(t)∈ Rdj for each PCA rankr and training timet, dropping the indexj for simplicity:
ur(t) =
(
⟨wji(t), ejr⟩
)
i≤dj
.
Its squared magnitude is proportional to the variance of the neuron weights along ther-
th principal direction, which should be of the order of1 at t = 0 due to the white noise
initialization, and evolves during training to reach the correspondingˆCj eigenvalue. On
the opposite, the direction of ur(t) encodes the sampling of the marginal distribution of
the neurons along ther-th principal direction: a large entryur(t)[i] indicates that neuron
i is signiﬁcantly correlated with the r-th principal component of ˆCj. This view allows
considering the evolution of the weightsWj(t) separately for each principal componentr.
Itoﬀersasimplerviewthanfocusingoneachindividualneuron i, becauseitgivesanaccount
of the population dynamics across neurons. It separates the weight matrix by columnsr
(in the weight PCA basis) rather than rowsi. We emphasize that we consider the PCA
basis of the ﬁnal covarianceˆCj, so that we analyze the training dynamics along the ﬁxed
principal axes ejr which do not depend on the training timet.
33


===== PAGE 34 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
1 100 200 300 400 500
ˆCj PCA rank r
100
2 × 100
3 × 100
4 × 100
6 × 100
Ampliﬁcation ar(t)
1 100 200 300 400 500
ˆCj PCA rank r
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cosine similarity cr(t)
Epoch t = 0
Epoch t = 1
Epoch t = 2
Epoch t = 5
Epoch t = 10
Epoch t = 20
□1 0 1
ˆCj PCA direction 1
□1
0
1
ˆCj PCA direction 2
□1 0 1
ˆCj PCA direction 1
□1
0
1
ˆCj PCA direction 100
□1 0 1
ˆCj PCA direction 100
□1
0
1
ˆCj PCA direction 101
Figure 10: The learning dynamic of a seven-hidden-layer scattering network trained on CIFAR-
10 is mainly a low-dimensional linear ampliﬁcation eﬀect that preserves most of the
positional information of the initialization. We present results for layerj = 4 (similar
behavior is observed for the other layers).Upper left: ampliﬁcation (overall stretch)
of the weight variance as a function of rank.Upper right: cosine similarity (internal
motion) as a function of rank.Lower panels: projections of individual neurons along
pairs of principal components. Each neuron is represented as a point in the plane, whose
trajectory during training is shown as a connected line (color indicates training time).
We now characterize the evolution ofur(t) during training for each rankr. We separate
changesinmagnitude, whichcorrespondtochangesinweightvariance(overallstretch), from
changes in direction, which correspond to internal motions of the neurons which preserve
their variance. We thus deﬁne two quantities to compareur(t) to its initialization ur(0),
namely the ampliﬁcation ratioar(t) and cosine similaritycr(t):
ar(t) =∥ur(t)∥
∥ur(0)∥ and cr(t) = ⟨ur(t), ur(0)⟩
∥ur(t)∥∥ ur(0)∥ . (18)
We evaluate these quantities using our seven-hidden-layer scattering network trained on
CIFAR-10. In Figure 10, we present the results for the intermediate layerj = 4 (similar
behavior is observed for the other layers). We show the two quantitiesar(t) and cr(t) in
the top row of Figure 10 as a function of the training epocht. We observe that the motion
34


===== PAGE 35 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
of the weight vector is mainly an ampliﬁcation eﬀect operating in a sequence starting with
the ﬁrst eigenvectors, as the cosine similarity remains of order unity. Given the considered
dimensionality (dj = 512), the observed departure from unity is rather small: the solid
angle subtended by this angular change of direction covers a vanishingly small surface of
the unit sphere indj dimensions. We thus haveur(t)≈ ar(t) ur(0).
These results show that the weight evolution can be written
Wj(t)≈ Gj ˆC1/2
j (t),
where Gj = Wj(0) is the initialization and the weight covarianceˆCj(t) evolves by ampliﬁ-
cation in its ﬁxed PCA basis:
ˆCj(t) =
∑
r
ar(t)2 ejr eT
jr .
In other words, the weight evolution during training is an ensemble motion of the neuron
population, with negligible internal motion of individual neurons relative to the population:
training amounts to learning the weight covariance. Surprisingly, the weight conﬁguration
at the end of training thus retains most of the information of its random initialization:
the initial conﬁguration can be practically recovered by whitening the trained weights.
In addition, the stochasticity introduced by SGD and data augmentation appears to be
negligible, as it does not aﬀect the relative positions of individual neurons during training.
This observation has two implications. First, the alignment rotations ˆAj which describe
the trained network relative to its inﬁnite-width rainbow counterpart (asˆφj≈ ˆAT
j φj) are
entirely determined by the initialization. Second, it provides an empirical explanation for
the validity of the Gaussian rainbow approximation. While this argument seems to imply
that the learned weight distributionsπj depend signiﬁcantly on the initialization scheme,
note that signiﬁcantly non-Gaussian initializations might not be preserved by SGD or could
lead to poor performance.
The bottom row of Figure 10 illustrates more directly the evolution of individual neu-
rons during training. Although each neuron ofWj(t) is described by a dj−1-dimensional
weight vector, it can be projected along two principal directions to obtain a two-dimensional
picture. We then visualize the trajectories of each neuron projected in this plane. The tra-
jectories are almost straight lines, as the learning dynamics only amplify variance along the
principal directions while preserving the relative positions of the neurons. Projections on
principal components of higher ranks give a more static picture as the ampliﬁcation along
these directions is smaller.
A large literature has characterized properties of SGD training dynamics. Several works
have observed that dynamics are linearized after a few epochs (Jastrzebski et al., 2020;
Leclerc and Madry, 2020), so that the weights remain in the same linearly connected basin
thereafter (Frankle et al., 2020). It has also been shown that the empirical neural tangent
kernel evolves mostly during this short initial phase (Fort et al., 2020) and aligns itself with
discriminative directions (Baratin et al., 2021; Atanasov et al., 2022). Our results indicate
that this change in the neural tangent kernel is due to the large ampliﬁcation of the neuron
weights along the principal axes ofˆCj, which happen early during training. The observation
that neural network weights have a low-rank departure from initialization has been made
35


===== PAGE 36 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
in connection with eigenvectors of the loss Hessian by Gur-Ari et al. (2018), in the lazy
regime by Thamm et al. (2022), for linear RNNs by Schuessler et al. (2020), and for large
language-model adaptation by Hu et al. (2022). The sequential emergence of the weight
principal components has been derived theoretically in linear networks by Saxe et al. (2014,
2019).
4. Conclusion
We have introduced rainbow networks as a model of the probability distribution of weights
of trained deep networks. The rainbow model relies on two assumptions. First, layer
dependencies are reduced to alignment rotations. Second, neurons are independent when
conditioned on the previous layer weights. Under these assumptions, trained networks
converge to a deterministic function in the corresponding rainbow RKHS when the layer
widths increase. We have veriﬁed numerically the convergence of activations after alignment
for scattering networks and ResNets trained on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. We conjecture
that this convergence conversely implies the rotation dependency assumption of the rainbow
model. We have veriﬁed this rotation on the second-order moments of the weights through
the convergence of their covariance after alignment (for scattering networks trained on
CIFAR-10 due to computational limitations).
The data-dependent kernels which describe the inﬁnite-width rainbow networks, and
thus their functional properties, are determined by the learned distributionsπj. Mathe-
matically, we have shown how the symmetry properties of these distributions are trans-
ferred on the network. Numerically, we have shown that their covariances Cj compute
projections in a low-dimensional “informative” subspace that is shared among networks,
is low-dimensional, and can be approximated eﬃciently with an unsupervised KPCA. It
reveals that networks balance low learning complexity with high expressivity by computing
a sequence of reductions and increases in dimensionality.
In the Gaussian case, the distributionsπj are determined by their covariancesCj. We
have validated that factorizing the learned weights with ﬁxed wavelet ﬁlters is suﬃcient to
obtain Gaussian rainbow networks on CIFAR-10, using scattering networks. In this setting,
we can generate new weights and have shown that the weight covariancesCj are suﬃcient
to capture most of the performance of the trained networks. Further, the training dynamics
are reduced to learning these covariances while preserving memory of the initialization in
the individual neuron weights.
Our work has several limitations. First, we have not veriﬁed the rainbow assumptions
of rotation dependence between layers beyond second-order moments, and conditional inde-
pendence between neurons beyond the Gaussian case. A complete model would incorporate
the training dynamics and show that such statistical properties are satisﬁed at all times.
Second, our numerical experiments have shown that the Gaussian rainbow approximation
of scattering networks gradually degrades when the network width is reduced. When this
approximation becomes less accurate, it raises the question whether incorporating more
prior information in the architecture could lead to Gaussian rainbow networks. Finally,
even in the Gaussian case, the rainbow model is not completely speciﬁed as it requires to
estimate the weight covariancesCj from trained weights. A major mathematical issue is to
36


===== PAGE 37 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
understand the properties of the resulting rainbow RKHS which result from properties of
these weight covariances.
By introducing the rainbow model, this work provides new insights towards understand-
ing the inner workings of deep networks.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by a grant from the PRAIRIE 3IA Institute of the
French ANR-19-P3IA-0001 program. BM acknowledges support from the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation. We thank the Scientiﬁc Computing Core at the Flatiron Institute for
the use of their computing resources. BM thanks Chris Olah and Eric Vanden-Eijnden for
inspiring discussions. FG would like to thank Francis Bach and Gabriel Peyré for helpful
pointers for the proof of Theorem 1. We also thank Kameron Decker Harris, Nathanaël
Cuvelle-Magar, and Etienne Lempereur for feedback on the manuscript.
Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 1
We prove a slightly more general version of Theorem 1 which we will need in the proof
of Theorem 2. We allow the input x to be in a possibly inﬁnite-dimensional separable
Hilbert spaceH0 (the ﬁnite-dimensional case is recovered withH0 = Rd0). We shall assume
that the random feature distribution π has bounded second- and fourth-order moments
in the sense of Section 2.2: it admits a bounded uncentered covariance operator C =
Ew∼π[wwT] and Ew∼π[(wTT w)2] < +∞ for every trace-class operatorT on H0. Without
loss of generality, we assume that the non-linearityσ is 1-Lipschitz and thatσ(0) = 0. These
last assumptions simplify the constants involved in the analysis. They can be satisﬁed for
any L-Lipschitz non-linearity σ by replacing it with(σ− σ(0))/L, which does not change
the linear expressivity of the network.
We give the proof outline in Appendix A.1. It relies on several lemmas, which are proven
inAppendicesA.2toA.5. Wewrite ∥·∥∞ theoperatornorm, ∥·∥2 theHilbert-Schmidtnorm,
and∥·∥1 the nuclear (or trace) norm.
A.1 Proof outline
The convergence of the activationsˆϕ(x) to the feature vectorϕ(x) relies on the convergence
of the empirical kernelˆk to the asymptotic kernelk. We thus begin by reformulating the
mean-square error Ex[∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥2
H] in terms of the kernelsˆk and k. More precisely,
we will consider the integral operatorsˆT and T associated to the kernels. These integral
operators are the inﬁnite-dimensional equivalent of Gram matrices(k(xi, xi′))1≤i,i′≤n.
Let µ be the distribution of x. We deﬁne the integral operator T : L2(µ)→ L2(µ)
associated to the asymptotic kernelk as
(T f)(x) = Ex′
[
k(x, x′) f(x′)
]
,
where x′ is an i.i.d. copy ofx and µ is the law ofx. Similarly, we denote ˆT the integral
operator deﬁned byˆk. Their standard properties are detailed in the next lemma. Moreover,
37


===== PAGE 38 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
the deﬁnition of ˆT entails that it is the average ofd1 i.i.d. integral operators deﬁned by the
individual random features(wi)i≤d1 of ˆϕ. The law of large numbers then implies a mean-
square convergence ofˆT to T, as proven in the following lemma.
Lemma 1 T and ˆT are trace-class non-negative self-adjoint operators onL2(µ), with
tr(T)≤∥ C∥∞ Ex[∥x∥2].
The eigenvalues ofT and ˆT are the same as their respective activation covariance matrices
Ex[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T] and Ex[ ˆϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]. Besides, it holds thatEW [ ˆT] = T and
√
EW
[
∥ ˆT− T∥2
2
]
=
√
EW,x,x′
[
|ˆk(x, x′)− k(x, x′)|2]
= c d−1/2
1 ,
with some constantc < +∞.
Note that the last statement is in fact an equality. We defer the proof, which relies on
standard properties and a direct calculation of the variance ofˆT around its mean T, to
Appendix A.2. In the following, we shall writec = κ∥C∥∞ Ex[∥x∥2] to simplify calculations
for the proof of Theorem 2, whereC = Ew∼π[wwT] is the uncentered covariance ofπ, and
κ is a constant. Whenπ is Gaussian, Appendix A.2 further shows thatκ≤
√
3.
The mean-square error between ˆϕ and ϕ after alignment can then be expressed as a
diﬀerent distance betweenˆT and T, as proven in the next lemma.
Lemma 2 The alignment error betweenˆϕ and ϕ is equal to the Bures-Wasserstein distance
BW between ˆT and T:
min
ˆA∈O(d1)
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥
2
H
]
= BW( ˆT , T)2.
The Bures-Wasserstein distance (Bhatia et al., 2019) is deﬁned, for any trace-class non-
negative self-adjoint operators ˆT and T, as
BW( ˆT , T)2 = min
ˆA∈O
(
L2(µ)
)∥ ˆA ˆT 1/2− T 1/2∥2
2 = tr
(
ˆT + T− 2
(
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2)1/2)
.
The minimization in the ﬁrst term is done over unitary operators ofL2(µ), and can be
solved in closed-form with a singular value decomposition ofT 1/2 ˆT 1/2 as in eqs. (5) and (6).
A direct calculation then shows that the minimal value is equal to the expression in the
second term, as in eq. (7). The Bures-Wasserstein distance arises in optimal transport
as the Wasserstein-2 distance between two zero-mean Gaussian distributions of respective
covariance operators ˆT and T, and in quantum information as the Bures distance, a non-
commutative generalization of the Hellinger distance. We refer the interested reader to
Bhatia et al. (2019) for more details. We defer the proof of Lemma 2 to Appendix A.3.
It remains to establish the convergence ofˆT towards T for the Bures-Wasserstein dis-
tance, which is a distance on the square roots of the operators. The main diﬃculty comes
from the fact that the square root is Lipschitz continuous only when bounded away from
zero. This lack of regularity in the optimization problem can be seen from the fact that
38


===== PAGE 39 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
the optimal alignment rotation ˆA is obtained by setting all singular values of some oper-
ator to one, which is unstable when this operator has vanishing singular values. We thus
consider an entropic regularization of the underlying optimal transport problem over ˆA
with a parameter λ > 0 that will be adjusted with d1. It penalizes the entropy of the
coupling so that singular values smaller thanλ are not ampliﬁed. It leads to a bound on
the Bures-Wasserstein distance, as shown in the following lemma.
Lemma 3 Let ˆT and T be two trace-class non-negative self-adjoint operators. For any
λ > 0, we have
BW( ˆT , T)2≤∥T∥2∥ ˆT− T∥2
λ + tr( ˆT− T ) + 2 tr
(
T + λId−
(
T 2 + λ2Id
)1/2)
. (19)
We defer the proof to Appendix A.4.
The ﬁrst two terms in eq. (19) are controlled in expectation with Lemma 1. The last
term, when divided byλ, has a similar behavior to another quantity which arises in least-
squares regression, namely the degrees of freedomtr(T (T + λId)−1) (Hastie and Tibshirani,
1987; Caponnetto and De Vito, 2007). It can be calculated by assuming a decay rate for
the eigenvalues ofT, as done in the next lemma.
Lemma 4 Let T be a trace-class non-negative self-adjoint operator whose eigenvalues sat-
isfy λm≤ c m−α for some α > 1 and c > 0. Then it holds:
tr
(
T + λId−
(
T 2 + λ2Id
)1/2)
≤ c′ λ1−1/α,
where the constantc′ = c1/α
1−1/α.
The proof is in Appendix A.5.
We now put together Lemmas 1 to 4. We have for anyλ > 0,
EW,x
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥2
H
]
= EW
[
BW( ˆT , T)2]
≤ κ∥C∥2
∞Ex[∥x∥2]2
λ√d1
+ 2c1/α
1− 1/α λ1− 1
α ,
wherewehaveusedtheCauchy-Schwarzinequalitytobound EW [∥ ˆT− T∥2]≤
∑
EW [∥ ˆT− T∥2
2]
and the fact that∥T∥2≤ tr T≤∥ C∥∞ Ex[∥x∥2]. We then optimize the upper bound with
respect to λ by setting
λ =
(
2c1/α√d1
κ∥C∥2
∞Ex[∥x∥2]2
(−α/(2α−1)
,
which yields
EW,x
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥2
H
]
≤ c′′ d−(α−1)/(4α−2)
1 ,
with a constant
c′′ = 2κ(α−1)/(2α−1)
(α− 1)/(2α− 1)
(
c
∥C∥∞Ex[∥x∥2]
(1/(2α−1)
∥C∥∞ Ex[∥x∥2].
39


===== PAGE 40 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Finally, the functionˆf can be written
ˆf(x) =⟨ ˆATθ, ˆϕ(x)⟩ =⟨θ, ˆA ˆϕ(x)⟩H ,
so that
| ˆf(x)− f(x)|2 =|⟨θ, ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)⟩H|2≤∥ θ∥2
H∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥
2
H .
Rewriting∥θ∥H =∥f∥H, assuming that θ is the minimum-norm vector such thatf(x) =
⟨θ, ϕ(x)⟩H, and using the convergence ofˆA ˆϕ towards ϕ then yields
EW,x
[
| ˆf(x)− f(x)|2]
≤ c′′∥f∥2
H d−(α−1)/(4α−2)
1 .
A.2 Proof of Lemma 1
We deﬁne the linear operatorΦ: L2(µ)→ H by
Φf = Ex[f(x) ϕ(x)].
Its adjointΦT : H→ L2(µ) is then given by
(ΦTu)(x) =⟨u, ϕ(x)⟩,
so that T = ΦTΦ. This proves thatT is self-adjoint and non-negative. On the other hand,
we have ΦΦT = Ex[ϕ(x) ϕ(x)T] the uncentered covariance matrix of the feature mapϕ
associated to the kernelk. This shows thatT and this uncentered covariance matrix have
the same eigenvalues.
Moreover, we have
tr(T ) = Ex[k(x, x)] = tr
(
ΦTΦ
)
=∥Φ∥2
2 = Ex
[
∥ϕ(x)∥2]
,
and using the deﬁnition ofk,
Ex[k(x, x)] = Ex,w
[
σ(⟨w, x⟩)2]
≤ Ex,w
[
|⟨w, x⟩|2]
= tr
(
C Ex
[
xxT])
≤∥ C∥∞ Ex
[
∥x∥2]
,
where w∼ π independently from x,|σ(t)|≤| t| by assumption on σ, and the last step
follows from Hölder’s inequality. This proves thatT is trace-class andΦ is Hilbert-Schmidt,
with an explicit upper bound on the trace.
Theaboveremarksarealsovalidfor ˆT withanappropriatedeﬁnitionof ˆΦ: L2(µ)→ Rd1.
We have EW [ ˆT] = T because EW [ˆk(x, x′)] = k(x, x′). Therefore, tr( ˆT) =∥ˆΦ∥2
2 is almost
surely ﬁnite because
EW [tr( ˆT)] = tr(T) < +∞.
Let ˆki(x, x′) = σ(⟨wi, x⟩) σ(⟨wi, x′⟩) where (wi)i≤dj are the rows ofW, and ˆTi the as-
sociated integral operators. The ˆTi are i.i.d. with EW [ ˆTi] = T as for ˆT, and we have
ˆT = d−1
1
∑d1
i=1 ˆTi. It then follows by standard variance calculations that
EW
[
∥ ˆT− T∥2
2
]
= 1
d1
(
EW
[
∥ ˆT1∥2
2
]
−∥ T∥2
2
)
= c
d1
,
40


===== PAGE 41 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
with a constantc such that
c≤ EW
[
∥ ˆT1∥2
2
]
≤ EW
[
tr( ˆT1)2]
= EW
[
Ex
[
σ(⟨w1, x⟩)2]2]
≤ EW
[
Ex
[
|⟨w1, x⟩|2]2]
.
We then have, using the assumption on the fourth moments ofπ,
EW
[
Ex
[
|⟨w1, x⟩|2]2]
= EW
[(
wT
1 Ex
[
xxT]
w1
)2]
< +∞,
because tr Ex[xxT] = Ex[∥x∥2] < +∞. When π is Gaussian, we further have
EW
[
Ex
[
|⟨w1, x⟩|2]2]
=
(
tr
(
C Ex
[
xxT]))2
+ 2 tr
((
C Ex
[
xxT])2)
≤ 3
(
tr
(
C Ex
[
xxT]))2
≤ 3∥C∥2
∞ Ex
[
∥x∥2]2
,
by classical fourth-moment computations of Gaussian random variables.
A.3 Proof of Lemma 2
The alignment error can be rewritten in terms of the linear operatorsΦ and ˆΦ deﬁned in
Appendix A.2:
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥2
H
]
=∥ ˆA ˆΦ− Φ∥2
2.
We then expand
∥ ˆA ˆΦ− Φ∥2
2 =∥ˆΦ∥2
2 +∥Φ∥2
2− 2 tr
(
ΦT ˆAˆΦ
)
.
The ﬁrst two terms are respectively equal to tr ˆT and tr T per Appendix A.2. The
alignment error is minimized withˆA = U V T from the SVD decomposition (Bhatia et al.,
2019):
ΦˆΦT = Ex
[
ϕ(x) ˆϕ(x)T]
= U SV T,
for which we then have
tr
(
ΦT ˆAˆΦ
)
= tr
(
ˆΦΦT ˆA
)
= tr
(
V SU TU V T)
= tr(S).
This can further be written
tr(S) = tr
((
U S2U T)1/2)
= tr
((
ΦˆΦT ˆΦΦT)1/2)
= tr
((
Φ ˆT ΦT)1/2)
.
To rewrite this in terms ofT, we perform a polar decomposition ofΦ: there exists a unitary
operator P : L2(µ)→ H such thatΦ = P T 1/2. We then have
tr
((
Φ ˆTΦT)1/2)
= tr
((
P T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2P T)1/2)
= tr
(
P
(
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2)1/2
P T
)
= tr
((
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2)1/2)
.
41


===== PAGE 42 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Putting everything together, we have
Ex
[
∥ ˆA ˆϕ(x)− ϕ(x)∥2
H
]
= tr
(
ˆT + T− 2
(
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2)1/2)
.
A.4 Proof of Lemma 3
The Bures-Wasserstein distance can be rewritten as a minimum over contractions rather
than unitary operators:
BW( ˆT , T)2 = min
∥ ˆA∥∞≤1
tr
(
ˆT + T− 2T 1/2 ˆA ˆT 1/2)
,
which holds because of Hölder’s inequality:
tr
(
T 1/2 ˆA ˆT 1/2)
= tr
(
ˆT 1/2T 1/2 ˆA
)
≤∥ ˆT 1/2T 1/2∥1∥ ˆA∥∞ = tr
((
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2)1/2)
∥ ˆA∥∞.
Rather than optimizing over contractions ˆA, which leads to a unitary ˆA, we shall use a
non-unitary ˆA with∥ ˆA∥∞ < 1.
We introduce an “entropic” regularization: letλ > 0, and deﬁne
BWλ( ˆT , T)2 = min
∥ ˆA∥∞≤1
tr
(
ˆT + T− 2T 1/2 ˆA ˆT 1/2)
+ λ log det
((
Id− ˆAT ˆA
)−1)
.
The second term corresponds to the negentropy of the coupling in the underlying optimal
transport formulation of the Bures-Wasserstein distance. It can be minimized in closed-
form by calculating the ﬁxed-point of Sinkhorn iterations (Janati et al., 2020), or with a
direct SVD calculation as in Appendix A.3. It is indeed clear that the minimum is attained
at some ˆAλ = U SλV T with T 1/2 ˆT 1/2 = U SV T, and this becomes a separable quadratic
problem over the singular valuesSλ. We thus ﬁnd
Sλ =
((
S2 + λ2Id
)1/2
− λId
)
S−1,
ˆAλ =
((
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2 + λ2Id
)1/2
− λId
)
T− 1
2 ˆT− 1
2 ,
and one can verify that we indeed have∥ ˆAλ∥∞ < 1. When plugged in the original distance,
it gives the following upper bound:
BW( ˆT , T)2≤ tr
(
ˆT + T− 2
((
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2 + λ2Id
)1/2
− λId
))
.
The term λ2Id in the square root makes this a Lipschitz continuous function of ˆT.
Indeed, deﬁne the functiong by
g( ˆT ) = tr
((
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2 + λ2Id
)1/2
− λId
)
.
Standard calculations (Bhatia et al., 2019; Janati et al., 2020) then show that
∇g( ˆT) = 1
2 T 1/2(
T 1/2 ˆT T 1/2 + λ2Id
)−1/2
T 1/2.
42


===== PAGE 43 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
It implies that
0 ≼∇g( ˆT) ≼ 1
2λ T,
where have used thatT 1/2 ˆT T 1/2 ≽ 0 in the second inequality, and ﬁnally,
∥∇g( ˆT)∥2≤∥T∥2
2λ .
This last inequality follows from
∥∇g( ˆT)∥2
2 = tr
(
∇g( ˆT)T∇g( ˆT)
)
≤ tr
(
∇g( ˆT)T 1
2λ T
)
≤∥∇ g( ˆT)∥2
∥T∥2
2λ ,
where we have used the operator-monotonicity of the mapM ↦→ tr
(
∇g( ˆT)TM
)
, which
holds because∇g( ˆT) ≽ 0.
Using the bound on the Lipschitz constant ofg, we can then write
|g( ˆT)− g(T)|≤ ∥T∥2
2λ ∥ ˆT− T∥2.
This leads to an inequality on the Bures-Wasserstein distance:
BW( ˆT , T)2≤ tr( ˆT + T)− 2g( ˆT )
= 2(tr(T )− g(T)) + tr(ˆT− T)− 2(g( ˆT)− g(T))
≤ 2(tr(T)− g(T )) + tr(ˆT− T) +∥T∥2
λ ∥ ˆT− T∥2,
which concludes the proof.
A.5 Proof of Lemma 4
We have
tr
(
T + λId−
(
T 2 + λ2Id
)1/2)
=
∞∑
m=1
(
λm + λ−
∑
λ2
m + λ2
)
We have the following inequality
λm + λ−
∑
λ2
m + λ2≤ min(λm, λ),
by using
∑
λ2
m + λ2≥ max(λm, λ).
We have λm ≤ c m−α for all m. We split the sum at M = ⌊(λ/c)−1/α⌋ (so that
c M−α≈ λ), and we have
M∑
m=1
(
λm + λ−
∑
λ2
m + λ2
)
≤
M∑
m=1
λ = M λ,
∞∑
m=M +1
(
λm + λ−
∑
λ2
m + λ2
)
≤
∞∑
m=M +1
λm≤ c
∞∑
m=M +1
m−α≤ c M 1−α
α− 1 ,
43


===== PAGE 44 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Finally,
∞∑
1=1
(
λm + λ−
∑
λ2
m + λ2
)
≤
(λ
c
)−1/α
λ + c
α− 1
(λ
c
)1−1/α
= c1/α
1− 1/α λ1−1/α.
Appendix B. Proof of Theorem 2
In this section, expectations are taken with respect to both the weightsW1, . . . , Wj and
the input x. We remind that Wj = W′
j ˆAj−1 with W′
j having i.i.d. rows w′
ji ∼ πj. Let
Cj = Ewj∼πj[wjwT
j ] be the uncentered covariance of πj. Similarly to Appendix A, we
assume without loss of generality thatσ is 1-Lipschitz and thatσ(0) = 0.
Let ˜φj = σW′
j φj−1. Let Aj∈O (dj) to be adjusted later. We have by deﬁnition ofˆAj:
√
E
[
∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
≤
√
E
[
∥Aj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
≤
√
E
[
∥Aj ˆφj(x)− Aj ˜φj(x)∥2]
+
√
E
[
∥Aj ˜φj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
,
(20)
where the last step follows by the triangle inequality. We now bound separately each term.
To bound the ﬁrst term, we compute the Lipschitz constant ofσW′
j (in expectation).
For anyz, z′∈ Hj−1, we have:
E
[
∥σW′
jz− σW′
jz′∥
2]
≤ 1
dj
E
[
∥W′
j(z− z′)∥
2]
= 1
dj
dj∑
i=1
E
[
|⟨w′
ji, z− z′⟩|
2]
= (z− z′)TCj(z− z′)
≤∥ Cj∥∞∥z− z′∥2,
where we have used the fact thatσ is 1-Lipschitz, and have made explicit the normalization
factor of d−1
j . We can therefore bound the ﬁrst term in eq. (20):
√
E
[
∥Aj ˆφj(x)− Aj ˜φj(x)∥2]
=
√
E
[
∥(σW′
j) ˆAj−1 ˆφj−1(x)− (σW′
j)φj−1(x)∥2]
≤∥ Cj∥1/2
∞
√
E
[
∥ ˆAj−1 ˆφj−1(x)− φj−1(x)∥2]
.
We deﬁne Aj, which was arbitrary, as the minimizer of the second term in eq. (20)
overO(dj). We can then apply Theorem 1 toz = φj−1(x). Indeed, Ez[ϕj(z) ϕj(z)T] =
Ex[φj(x) φj(x)T] is trace-class with eigenvalues λj,m = O(m−αj), and πj has bounded
second- and fourth-order moments. Therefore, there exists a constantcj such that
√
E
[
∥Aj ˜φj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
=
√
E
[
∥Aj σW′
j φj−1(x)− ϕj φj−1(x)∥2]
≤∥ Cj∥1/2
∞
∑
E[
φj−1(x)
2] cj d
−ηj /2
j ,
44


===== PAGE 45 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
with ηj =
αj−1
2(2αj−1). We have made explicit the factors∥Cj∥1/2
∞
∑
E[
φj−1(x)
2] in the con-
stant coming from Theorem 1 to simplify the expressions in the sequel. We can further
bound
∑
E[∥φj−1(x)∥2] by iteratively applying Lemma 1 from Appendix A:
∑
E[∥φj−1(x)∥2]≤∥ Cj−1∥1/2
∞ ···∥ C1∥1/2
∞
∑
E[∥x∥2].
We thus have shown:
√
E
[
∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
≤∥ Cj∥1/2
∞
√
E
[
∥ ˆAj−1 ˆφj−1(x)− φj−1(x)∥2]
+∥Cj∥1/2
∞ ···∥ C1∥1/2
∞
∑
E[∥x∥2] cj d
−ηj /2
j .
It then follows by induction:
√
E
[
∥ ˆAj ˆφj(x)− φj(x)∥2]
≤∥ Cj∥1/2
∞ ···∥ C1∥1/2
∞
∑
E[∥x∥2]
j∑
ℓ=1
cℓ d−ηℓ/2
ℓ .
We conclude like in the proof of Theorem 1:
√
E
[
| ˆf(x)− f(x)|2]
≤∥ f∥HJ
∥CJ∥1/2
∞ ···∥ C1∥1/2
∞
∑
E[∥x∥2]
J∑
j=1
cj d
−ηj /2
j .
We ﬁnally show the convergence of the kernels. Let˜kj be the kernel deﬁned by the
feature map ˜φj. Expectations are now also taken with respect tox′, an i.i.d. copy ofx. We
have by the triangle inequality:
|ˆkj(x, x′)− kj(x, x′)|≤| ˆkj(x, x′)− ˜kj(x, x′)| +|˜kj(x, x′)− kj(x, x′)|. (21)
For the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side:
|ˆkj(x, x′)− ˜kj(x, x′)| =|⟨ˆφj(x), ˆφj(x′)⟩−⟨ ˜φj(x), ˜φj(x′)⟩|
≤|⟨ ˆφj(x), ˆφj(x′)− ˜φj(x′)⟩ +⟨ˆφj(x)− ˜φj(x), ˜φj(x′)⟩|
≤∥ ˆφj(x)∥∥ˆφj(x′)− ˜φj(x′)∥ +∥˜φj(x′)∥∥ˆφj(x)− ˜φj(x)∥.
We thus have, becausex, x′ are i.i.d.,
√
E
[
|ˆkj(x, x′)− ˜kj(x, x′)|2]
≤
√
E
[
∥ˆφj(x)∥2]
E
[
∥ˆφj(x′)− ˜φj(x′)∥2]
+
√
E
[
∥˜φj(x′)∥2]
E
[
∥ˆφj(x)− ˜φj(x)∥2]
.
Using the Lipschitz constant ofσW′
j in expectation as above:
√
E
[
|ˆkj(x, x′)− ˜kj(x, x′)|2]
≤ 2∥Cj∥∞
√
E
[
∥φj−1(x)∥2]
E
[
∥ˆφj−1(x)− φj−1(x)∥2]
.
45


===== PAGE 46 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
The factors on the right-hand side can be bounded using the above, to yield
√
E
[
|ˆkj(x, x′)− ˜kj(x, x′)|2]
≤ 2∥Cj∥∞···∥ C1∥∞E[∥x∥2]
j−1∑
ℓ=1
cℓ d−ηℓ/2
ℓ .
The second term on the right-hand side of eq. (21) can be bounded with Theorem 1
applied to z = φj−1(x) as before:
√
E
[
|˜kj(x, x′)− kj(x, x′)|2]
≤ κj∥Cj∥∞···∥ C1∥∞E[∥x∥2] d−1/2
j .
where we have again used the upper bound on
∑
E[
φj−1(x)
2].
We thus have shown that
√
E
[
|kj(x, x′)− kj(x, x′)|2]
≤∥ Cj∥∞···∥ C1∥∞E[∥x∥2]

2
j−1∑
ℓ=1
cℓ d−ηℓ/2
ℓ + κj d−1/2
j
(
(.
Appendix C. Proof of Theorem 3
We prove the result by induction on the layer indexj. We initialize with φ0(x) = x,
which admits an orthogonal representation ρ0(g) = g. Now suppose that φj−1 admits
an orthogonal representation ρj−1. Let w ∼ πj, we have that ρj−1(g)Tw ∼ πj for all
g∈ G by hypothesis. When πj =N (0, Cj), this is equivalent toρj−1(g)TCjρj−1(g) = Cj,
i.e. ρj−1(g)Cj = Cjρj−1(g). We begin by showing that φj then admits an orthogonal
representation ρj.
We have
φj(gx) = ϕj(φj−1(gx)) = ϕj(ρj−1(g)φj−1(x)).
For simplicity, here we deﬁne the feature mapϕj with ϕj(z)(w) = σ(⟨w, z⟩) with Hj =
L2(πj) (the result of the theorem does however not depend on this choice, as all feature
maps are related by a rotation). Then,
φj(gx)(w) = σ
(⟨
w, ρj−1(g)φj−1(x)
⟩)
= σ(⟨ρj−1(g)Tw, φj−1(x)⟩).
For eachg∈ G, we thus deﬁne the operatorρj(g) by its action onψ∈ Hj:
(ρj(g)ψ)(w) = ψ(ρj−1(g)Tw).
It is obviously linear, and bounded as
ρj(g)

∞ = 1:
ρj(g)ψ
2
Hj
= Ew
[
ψ(ρj−1(g)Tw)2]
= Ew
[
ψ(w)2]
=∥ψ∥2
Hj
,
where we have used thatρj−1(g)Tw∼ w. We further verify thatρj(gg′) = ρj(g)ρj(g′):
(ρj(gg′)ψ)(w) = ψ(ρj−1(gg′)Tw) = ψ(ρj−1(g′)Tρj−1(g)Tw)
= (ρj(g′)ψ)(ρj−1(g)Tw) = (ρj(g)ρj(g′)ψ)(w).
46


===== PAGE 47 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
We can thus writeφj(gx) = ρj(g)φj(x), which shows thatφj admits a representation.
It remains to show thatρj(g) is orthogonal. The adjointρj(g)T is equal toρj(gT):
]
ρj(g)ψ, ψ′⟩
Hj
= Ew
[
ψ(ρj−1(g)Tw)ψ′(w)
]
= Ew
[
ψ(w)ψ′(ρj−1(g)w)
]
=
]
ψ, ρj(gT)ψ′⟩
Hj
,
where we have usedρj−1(g)T = ρj−1(gT) since ρj−1 is a group homomorphism. It is then
straightforward that ρj(g)ρj(g)T = ρj(g)Tρj(g) = Id by using again the fact thatρj is a
group homomorphism. This proves thatρj(g)∈ O(Hj).
We ﬁnally show that the rainbow kernelkj is invariant. We have
kj(gx, gx′) =
]
φj(gx), φj(gx′)
⟩
Hj
=
]
ρj(g)φj(x), ρj(g)φj(x′)
⟩
Hj
=
]
φj(x), φj(x′)
⟩
Hj
= kj(x, x′),
which concludes the proof.
Appendix D. Experimental details
Normalization. In all the networks considered in this paper, after each non-linearityσ,
a 2D batch-normalization layer (Ioﬀe and Szegedy, 2015) without learned aﬃne param-
eters sets the per-channel mean and variance across space and data samples to0 and 1
respectively. After training, we multiply the learned standard deviations by1/
∑
dj and the
learned weight matricesLj+1 by
∑
dj as per our normalization conventions. This ensures
that Ex[ˆφj(x)] = 0 and Ex[∥ˆφj(x)∥2] = 1, which enables more direct comparisons between
networks of diﬀerent sizes. When evaluating activation convergence for ResNet-18, we ex-
plicitly compute these expectations on the training set and standardize the activationsˆφj(x)
after training for additional numerical stability. When sampling weights from the Gaussian
rainbow model, the mean and variance parameters of the normalization layers are computed
on the training set before alignment and sampling of the next layer.
Scattering networks. We use the learned scattering architecture of Guth et al. (2022),
with several simpliﬁcations based on the setting.
The prior operatorPj performs a convolution of every channel of its input with prede-
ﬁned ﬁlters: one real low-pass Gabor ﬁlterφ (a Gaussian window) and4 oriented Morlet
wavelets ψθ (complex exponentials localized with a Gaussian window) (Andreux et al.,
2020). Pj also implements a subsampling by a factor2 on even layer indicesj, with a slight
modiﬁcation of the ﬁlters to compute wavelet coeﬃcients at intermediate scales. See Guth
et al. (2022, Appendix G) for a precise deﬁnition of the ﬁlters. The learned weight matrices
Lj are real for CIFAR-10 experiments, and complex for ImageNet experiments.
We impose a commutation property betweenPj and Lj, so that we implementWj =
Pj Lj. It is equivalent to havingWj = Lj Pj, with the constraint thatLj is applied pointwise
with respect to the channels created byPj. The non-linearityσ is a complex modulus, which
is only applied on the high-frequency channels. A scattering layer writes:
σWjz =
(
Ljz∗ φ,
⏐⏐Ljz∗ ψθ
⏐⏐)
θ.
47


===== PAGE 48 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
The input (and therefore output) ofLj are then both real whenLj is real.
We apply a pre-processing σP0 to the input x before feeding it to the network. The
fully-connected classiﬁer θ is preceded with a learned1× 1 convolution LJ+1 which reduces
the channel dimension. The learned scattering architecture thus writes:
ˆf(x) = θTLJ+1 σPJ LJ··· σP1L1 σP0x.
The number of output channels ofLj is given in Table 1.
As explained above, we include a 2D batch-normalization layer without learned aﬃne
parameters after each non-linearityσ, as well as before the classiﬁerθ. Furthermore, after
each operator Lj, a divisive normalization sets the norm along channels at each spatial
location to1 (except in Figures 4, 5 and 10). There are no learned biases in the architecture
beyond the unsupervised channel means.
The non-linearity σ includes a skip-connection in Figures 5 and 9, in which case a
scattering layer computes
σWjz =
(
Ljz∗ φ, Ljz∗ ψθ,
⏐⏐Ljz∗ φ
⏐⏐,
⏐⏐Ljz∗ ψθ
⏐⏐)
θ.
In this case, the activationsφj(x) are complex. The rainbow model extends to this case
by adding complex conjugates at appropriate places. For instance, the alignment matrices
become complex unitary operators when both activations and weights are complex.
j 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
CIFAR-10 (J = 3) dj 64 128 256 512 - - - - - - -
CIFAR-10 (J = 7) dj 64 128 256 512 512 512 512 512 - - -
ImageNet (J = 10) dj 32 64 64 128 256 512 512 512 512 512 256
Table 1: Numberdj of output channels ofLj, 1≤ j≤ J +1. The total number of projectors
is J + 1 = 4 or J + 1 = 8 for CIFAR-10 andJ + 1 = 11 for ImageNet.
ResNet. Pj is the patch-extraction operator deﬁned in Section 2.3. The non-linearityσ is
a ReLU. We have trained a slightly diﬀerent ResNet with no bias parameters. In addition,
the batch-normalization layers have no learned aﬃne parameters, and are placed after the
non-linearity to be consistent with our normalization conventions. The top-5 test accuracy
on ImageNet remains at89% like the original model.
Training. Network weights are initialized with i.i.d. samples from an uniform distribution
(Glorot and Bengio, 2010) with so-called Kaiming variance scaling (He et al., 2015), which is
the default in the PyTorch library (Paszke et al., 2019). Despite the uniform initialization,
weight marginals become Gaussian after a single training epoch. Scattering networks are
trained for 150 epochs with an initial learning rate of0.01 which is divided by10 every 50
epochs, with a batch size of128. ResNets are trained for90 epochs with an initial learning
rate of 0.1 which is divided by10 every 30 epochs, with a batch size of256. We use the
optimizer SGD with a momentum of0.9 and a weight decay of10−4 (except for Figures 4
48


===== PAGE 49 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
and 10 where weight decay has been disabled). We use classical data augmentations: hori-
zontal ﬂips and random crops for CIFAR, random resized crops of size224 and horizontal
ﬂips for ImageNet. The classiﬁcation error on the ImageNet validation set is computed on
a single center crop of size224.
Activation covariances. The covariance of the activationsˆφj(x) is computed over chan-
nels and averaged across space. Precisely, we compute
Ex
)∑
u
ˆφj(x)[u] ˆφj(x)[u]T
]
,
where ˆφj(x)[u] is a channel vector of dimensiond′
j at spatial locationu. It yields a matrix
of dimension d′
j× d′
j. For scattering networks, thed′
j channels correspond to thedj output
channels of Lj times the 5 scattering channels computed byPj (times 2 when σ includes a
skip-connection). For ResNet, ˆφj(x)[u] is a patch of sizesj× sj centered at u due to the
operator Pj. dj is thus equal to the numberd′
j of channels ofˆφj multiplied by s2
j.
References
Kumar K Agrawal, Arnab Kumar Mondal, Arna Ghosh, and Blake Richards. α-ReQ :
Assessing representation quality in self-supervised learning by measuring eigenspectrum
decay. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 17626–
17638, 2022.
Samuel K Ainsworth, Jonathan Hayase, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. Git re-basin: Merging
models modulo permutation symmetries.arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04836, 2022.
M. Andreux, T. Angles, G. Exarchakis, R. Leonarduzzi, G. Rochette, L. Thiry, J. Zarka,
S. Mallat, J. Andén, E. Belilovsky, J. Bruna, V. Lostanlen, M. J. Hirn, E. Oyallon,
S. Zhang, C. E. Cella, and M. Eickenberg. Kymatio: Scattering transforms in python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(60):1–6, 2020.
Fabio Anselmi, Lorenzo Rosasco, Cheston Tan, and Tomaso Poggio. Deep convolutional
networks are hierarchical kernel machines.arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01084, 2015.
Nachman Aronszajn. Theory of reproducing kernels.Transactions of the American mathe-
matical society, 68(3):337–404, 1950.
Alexander Atanasov, Blake Bordelon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Neural networks as kernel
learners: The silent alignment eﬀect. InInternational Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2022.
Francis Bach. On the equivalence between kernel quadrature rules and random feature
expansions. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):714–751, 2017.
Jinho Baik, Gérard Ben Arous, and Sandrine Péché. Phase transition of the largest eigen-
value for nonnull complex sample covariance matrices.The Annals of Probability, 33(5):
1643–1697, 2005.
49


===== PAGE 50 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Aristide Baratin, Thomas George, César Laurent, R Devon Hjelm, Guillaume Lajoie, Pascal
Vincent, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Implicit regularization via neural feature alignment.
In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 2269–2277.
PMLR, 2021.
Sergey Bartunov, Adam Santoro, Blake Richards, Luke Marris, Geoﬀrey E Hinton, and
Timothy Lillicrap. Assessing the scalability of biologically-motivated deep learning al-
gorithms and architectures. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
2018.
David Bau, Jun-Yan Zhu, Hendrik Strobelt, Agata Lapedriza, Bolei Zhou, and Antonio
Torralba. Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network.Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30071–30078, 2020.
Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning.
In Proceedings of ICML workshop on unsupervised and transfer learning, pages 17–36.
JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2012.
FrederikBenzing, SimonSchug, RobertMeier, JohannesVonOswald, YassirAkram, Nicolas
Zucchet, Laurence Aitchison, and Angelika Steger. Random initialisations performing
above chance and how to ﬁnd them. InOPT 2022: Optimization for Machine Learning
(NeurIPS 2022 Workshop), 2022.
Rajendra Bhatia, Tanvi Jain, and Yongdo Lim. On the Bures–Wasserstein distance between
positive deﬁnite matrices.Expositiones Mathematicae, 37(2):165–191, 2019.
Alberto Bietti. Foundations of deep convolutional models through kernel methods. Theses,
Université Grenoble Alpes, 2019.
Alberto Bietti and Francis Bach. Deep equals shallow for ReLU networks in kernel regimes.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Alberto Bietti and Julien Mairal. Group invariance, stability to deformations, and com-
plexity of deep convolutional representations.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20
(25):1–49, 2019.
Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan. Self-consistent dynamical ﬁeld theory of kernel evo-
lution in wide neural networks.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
32240–32256, 2022.
Blake Bordelon, Abdulkadir Canatar, and Cengiz Pehlevan. Spectrum dependent learning
curves in kernel regression and wide neural networks. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 1024–1034. PMLR, 2020.
Francesco Cagnetta, Alessandro Favero, and Matthieu Wyart. What can be learnt with
wide convolutional neural networks? InInternational Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 3347–3379. PMLR, 2023.
Andrea Caponnetto and Ernesto De Vito. Optimal rates for the regularized least-squares
algorithm. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 7:331–368, 2007.
50


===== PAGE 51 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Zhengdao Chen, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and Joan Bruna. A functional-space mean-ﬁeld
theory of partially-trained three-layer neural networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16286,
2022.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
parameterized models using optimal transport.Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 31, 2018.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. Implicit bias of gradient descent for wide two-layer neural
networks trained with the logistic loss. InConference on Learning Theory, pages 1305–
1338. PMLR, 2020.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in diﬀerentiable
programming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 22, 2009.
François Chollet. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. InPro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1251–
1258, 2017.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. InProceedings
of the 33nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 48 ofJMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pages 2990–2999, 2016.
Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Algorithms for learning kernels
based on centered alignment.The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):795–828,
2012.
Nello Cristianini, John Shawe-Taylor, Andre Elisseeﬀ, and Jaz Kandola. On kernel-target
alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 14, 2001.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport.Advances
in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Amit Daniely, Roy Frostig, and Yoram Singer. Toward deeper understanding of neural
networks: The power of initialization and a dual view on expressivity. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Misha Denil, Babak Shakibi, Laurent Dinh, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Nando De Fre-
itas. Predicting parameters in deep learning.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 26, 2013.
Emily L Denton, Wojciech Zaremba, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, and Rob Fergus. Exploiting
linear structure within convolutional networks for eﬃcient evaluation.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Katharina Dobs, Julio Martinez, Alexander JE Kell, and Nancy Kanwisher. Brain-like func-
tional specialization emerges spontaneously in deep neural networks.Science advances,
8(11):eabl8913, 2022.
51


===== PAGE 52 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
David L Donoho, Matan Gavish, and Iain M Johnstone. Optimal shrinkage of eigenvalues
in the spiked covariance model.Annals of statistics, 46(4):1742, 2018.
Felix Draxler, Kambis Veschgini, Manfred Salmhofer, and Fred Hamprecht. Essentially no
barriers in neural network energy landscape. InInternational Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 1309–1318. PMLR, 2018.
Alexis Dubreuil, Adrian Valente, Manuel Beiran, Francesca Mastrogiuseppe, and Srdjan
Ostojic. The role of population structure in computations through neural dynamics.
Nature neuroscience, 25(6):783–794, 2022.
Weinan E and Stephan Wojtowytsch. On the banach spaces associated with multi-layer relu
networks: Function representation, approximation theory and gradient descent dynamics.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15623, 2020.
Noureddine El Karoui. Spectrum estimation for large dimensional covariance matrices using
random matrix theory.The Annals of Statistics, pages 2757–2790, 2008a.
Noureddine El Karoui. Operator norm consistent estimation of large-dimensional sparse
covariance matrices.The Annals of Statistics, 36(6):2717–2756, 2008b.
Eric Elmoznino and Michael F Bonner. High-performing neural network models of visual
cortex beneﬁt from high latent dimensionality.bioRxiv, pages 2022–07, 2022.
Rahim Entezari, Hanie Sedghi, Olga Saukh, and Behnam Neyshabur. The role of per-
mutation invariance in linear mode connectivity of neural networks. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Stanislav Fort, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Mansheej Paul, Sepideh Kharaghani, Daniel M
Roy, and Surya Ganguli. Deep learning versus kernel learning: an empirical study of loss
landscape geometry and the time evolution of the neural tangent kernel.Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:5850–5861, 2020.
Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear
mode connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 3259–3269. PMLR, 2020.
C Daniel Freeman and Joan Bruna. Topology and geometry of half-rectiﬁed network opti-
mization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew G
Wilson. Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Leszek Gawarecki and Vidyadhar Mandrekar. Stochastic diﬀerential equations.Stochastic
Diﬀerential Equations in Inﬁnite Dimensions: with Applications to Stochastic Partial
Diﬀerential Equations, pages 73–149, 2011.
Mario Geiger, Stefano Spigler, Arthur Jacot, and Matthieu Wyart. Disentangling feature
and lazy training in deep neural networks.Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
Experiment, 2020(11):113301, 2020.
52


===== PAGE 53 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feedforward
neural networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence and statistics, pages 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
2010.
Guy Gur-Ari, Daniel A Roberts, and Ethan Dyer. Gradient descent happens in a tiny
subspace. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04754, 2018.
Florentin Guth, John Zarka, and Stephane Mallat. Phase Collapse in Neural Networks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Babak Hassibi and David Stork. Second order derivatives for network pruning: Optimal
brain surgeon. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 5, 1992.
Trevor Hastie and Robert Tibshirani. Generalized additive models: some applications.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 82(398):371–386, 1987.
JamesVHaxby, JSwaroopGuntupalli, AndrewCConnolly, YaroslavOHalchenko, BryanR
Conroy, M Ida Gobbini, Michael Hanke, and Peter J Ramadge. A common, high-
dimensional model of the representational space in human ventral temporal cortex.Neu-
ron, 72(2):404–416, 2011.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectiﬁers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 770–778, 2016.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan
Kianinejad, Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling
is predictable, empirically.arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.
Jordan Hoﬀmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai,
Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan
Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan
Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol
Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
John R Hurley and Raymond B Cattell. The Procrustes program: Producing direct rotation
to test a hypothesized factor structure.Behavioral science, 7(2):258, 1962.
53


===== PAGE 54 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network train-
ing by reducing internal covariate shift. InProceedings of the 32nd International Con-
ference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 37, page 448–456,
2015.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence
and generalization in neural networks.Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 31, 2018.
Hicham Janati, Boris Muzellec, Gabriel Peyré, and Marco Cuturi. Entropic optimal trans-
port between unbalanced Gaussian measures has a closed form. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33:10468–10479, 2020.
Kevin Jarrett, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Yann LeCun. What is the
best multi-stage architecture for object recognition? In 2009 IEEE 12th international
conference on computer vision, pages 2146–2153. IEEE, 2009.
Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Maciej Szymczak, Stanislav Fort, Devansh Arpit, Jacek Tabor,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Krzysztof Geras. The break-even point on optimization trajec-
tories of deep neural networks. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
Iain M Johnstone. On the distribution of the largest eigenvalue in principal components
analysis. The Annals of statistics, 29(2):295–327, 2001.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon
Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeﬀrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution
in neural networks to the action of compact groups. InProceedings of the 35th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, volume 80 ofProceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 2747–2755, 2018.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoﬀrey Hinton. Similarity of
neural network representations revisited. InInternational Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 3519–3529. PMLR, 2019.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity
analysis-connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuro-
science, page 4, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report,
University of Toronto, 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
25, NeurIPS, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
54


===== PAGE 55 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Guillaume Leclerc and Aleksander Madry. The two regimes of deep network training.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.10376, 2020.
Yann LeCun and Yoshua Bengio. Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time
series. The handbook of brain theory and neural networks, 3361(10):1995, 1995.
Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard Howard, Wayne
Hubbard, and Lawrence Jackel. Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation
network. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2, 1989a.
Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. Optimal brain damage.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2, 1989b.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeﬀrey Pennington,
and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as Gaussian processes. InInternational
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
Dickstein, and Jeﬀrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear
models under gradient descent.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
2019.
Jaehoon Lee, Samuel Schoenholz, Jeﬀrey Pennington, Ben Adlam, Lechao Xiao, Roman
Novak, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Finite versus inﬁnite neural networks: an empirical
study. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15156–15172, 2020.
Zhiyuan Li, Ruosong Wang, Dingli Yu, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Sanjeev Arora. Enhanced convolutional neural tangent kernels. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.00809, 2019.
Zongming Ma. Sparse principal component analysis and iterative thresholding.The Annals
of Statistics, 41(2):772–801, 2013.
Julien Mairal. End-to-end kernel learning with supervised convolutional kernel networks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Julien Mairal, Piotr Koniusz, Zaid Harchaoui, and Cordelia Schmid. Convolutional kernel
networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.
Stephane Mallat. Group invariant scattering.Communications on Pure and Applied Math-
ematics, 65(10):1331–1398, 2012.
Alexander Maloney, Daniel A Roberts, and James Sully. A solvable model of neural scaling
laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16859, 2022.
Vladimir A Marčenko and Leonid A Pastur. Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of
random matrices. Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik, 1(4):457, 1967.
Charles H Martin and Michael W Mahoney. Implicit self-regularization in deep neural net-
works: Evidence from random matrix theory and implications for learning.The Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):7479–7551, 2021.
55


===== PAGE 56 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Alexander G de G Matthews, Mark Rowland, Jiri Hron, Richard E Turner, and Zoubin
Ghahramani. Gaussian process behaviour in wide deep neural networks.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.11271, 2018.
Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean ﬁeld view of the landscape
of two-layers neural networks.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(33):
E7665–E7671, 2018.
Stanislav Minsker. On some extensions of Bernstein’s inequality for self-adjoint operators.
Statistics & Probability Letters, 127:111–119, 2017.
Sreyas Mohan, Zahra Kadkhodaie, Eero P Simoncelli, and Carlos Fernandez-Granda. Ro-
bust and interpretable blind image denoising via bias-free convolutional neural networks.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in
neural networks with canonical correlation.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 31, 2018.
Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science &
Business Media, 1996.
Phan-Minh Nguyen and Huy Tuan Pham. A rigorous framework for the mean ﬁeld limit of
multilayer neural networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.11443, 2020.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization.Distill,
2017. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization.
Jordan Ott, Erik Linstead, Nicholas LaHaye, and Pierre Baldi. Learning in the machine:
To share or not to share?Neural Networks, 126:235–249, 2020. ISSN 0893-6080.
Edouard Oyallon and Stephane Mallat. Deep roto-translation scattering for object classiﬁ-
cation. InIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR, pages
2865–2873. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
Biraj Pandey, Marius Pachitariu, Bingni W Brunton, and Kameron Decker Harris. Struc-
tured random receptive ﬁelds enable informative sensory encodings.PLoS Computational
Biology, 18(10):e1010484, 2022.
Vardan Papyan. Measurements of three-level hierarchical structure in the outliers in the
spectrum of deepnet Hessians. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
5012–5021. PMLR, 2019.
AdamPaszke, SamGross, FranciscoMassa, AdamLerer, JamesBradbury, GregoryChanan,
Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, An-
dreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank
Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch:
An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. InAdvances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, pages 8024–8035, 2019.
56


===== PAGE 57 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport: With applications to
data science. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Nicolas Pinto, David Doukhan, James J DiCarlo, and David D Cox. A high-throughput
screening approach to discovering good forms of biologically inspired visual representa-
tion. PLoS computational biology, 5(11):e1000579, 2009.
Roman Pogodin, Yash Mehta, Timothy Lillicrap, and Peter E Latham. Towards biologically
plausible convolutional networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:13924–13936, 2021.
Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, Daniel Beaglehole, Parthe Pandit, and Mikhail Belkin.
Mechanism for feature learning in neural networks and backpropagation-free machine
learning models. Science, 383(6690):1461–1467, 2024.
Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. SVCCA: Singu-
lar vector canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 20, 2007.
Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Uniform approximation of functions with random bases.
In 46th annual Allerton conference on communication, control, and computing, pages
555–561. IEEE, 2008.
Stefano Recanatesi, Matthew Farrell, Madhu Advani, Timothy Moore, Guillaume Lajoie,
and Eric Shea-Brown. Dimensionality compression and expansion in deep neural net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00443, 2019.
Markus Riedle. Cylindrical wiener processes.Séminaire de Probabilités XLIII, pages 191–
214, 2011.
Grant M Rotskoﬀ and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Trainability and accuracy of neural networks:
An interacting particle system approach.arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00915, 2018.
Alessandro Rudi, Guillermo D Canas, and Lorenzo Rosasco. On the sample complexity of
subspace learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26,
2013.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhi-
heng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C Berg,
and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge.International Journal
of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015.
Levent Sagun, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. Eigenvalues of the Hessian in deep learning:
Singularity and beyond.arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07476, 2016.
Levent Sagun, Utku Evci, V Ugur Guney, Yann Dauphin, and Leon Bottou. Em-
pirical analysis of the Hessian of over-parametrized neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.04454, 2017.
57


===== PAGE 58 =====
Guth, Ménard, Rochette, and Mallat
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear
dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2014.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. A mathematical theory of
semantic development in deep neural networks.Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 116(23):11537–11546, 2019.
Meyer Scetbon and Zaid Harchaoui. A spectral analysis of dot-product kernels. In In-
ternational conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, pages 3394–3402. PMLR,
2021.
Bernhard Schölkopf and Alexander J Smola. Learning with kernels: support vector ma-
chines, regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT press, 2002.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Alexander Smola, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Kernel principal compo-
nent analysis. In Artiﬁcial Neural Networks—ICANN’97: 7th International Conference
Lausanne, Switzerland, October 8–10, 1997 Proceeedings, pages 583–588. Springer Verlag,
1997.
Peter H Schönemann. A generalized solution of the orthogonal Procrustes problem.Psy-
chometrika, 31(1):1–10, 1966.
Friedrich Schuessler, Francesca Mastrogiuseppe, Alexis Dubreuil, Srdjan Ostojic, and Omri
Barak. The interplay between randomness and structure during learning in RNNs.Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13352–13362, 2020.
Inbar Seroussi, Gadi Naveh, and Zohar Ringel. Separation of scales and a thermodynamic
description of feature learning in some cnns.Nature Communications, 14(1):908, 2023.
Vaishaal Shankar, Alex Fang, Wenshuo Guo, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley,
Ludwig Schmidt, and Benjamin Recht. Neural kernels without tangents. InInternational
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8614–8623. PMLR, 2020.
Laurent Sifre and Stephane Mallat. Rotation, scaling and deformation invariant scattering
for texture discrimination. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 1233–1240, 2013.
Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Mean ﬁeld analysis of neural networks: A
law of large numbers.SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 80(2):725–752, 2020.
JustinSirignanoandKonstantinosSpiliopoulos. Meanﬁeldanalysisofdeepneuralnetworks.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 47(1):120–152, 2022.
SamuelLSmith, DavidHPTurban, StevenHamblin, andNilsYHammerla. Oﬄinebilingual
word vectors, orthogonal transformations and the inverted softmax. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Stefano Spigler, Mario Geiger, and Matthieu Wyart. Asymptotic learning curves of kernel
methods: empirical data versus teacher–student paradigm. Journal of Statistical Me-
chanics: Theory and Experiment, 2020(12):124001, 2020.
58


===== PAGE 59 =====
A Rainbow in Deep Network Black Boxes
Bharath K Sriperumbudur and Nicholas Sterge. Approximate kernel PCA: Computational
versus statistical trade-oﬀ.The Annals of Statistics, 50(5):2713–2736, 2022.
Carsen Stringer, Marius Pachitariu, Nicholas Steinmetz, Matteo Carandini, and Kenneth D
Harris. High-dimensional geometry of population responses in visual cortex.Nature, 571
(7765):361–365, 2019.
Matthias Thamm, Max Staats, and Bernd Rosenow. Random matrix analysis of deep neural
network weight matrices.Physical Review E, 106(5):054124, 2022.
Louis Thiry, Michael Arbel, Eugene Belilovsky, and Edouard Oyallon. The unreason-
able eﬀectiveness of patches in deep convolutional kernels methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.07528, 2021.
Asher Trockman, Devin Willmott, and J Zico Kolter. Understanding the covariance struc-
ture of convolutional ﬁlters. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
Joel A Tropp. User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices. Foundations of
computational mathematics, 12:389–434, 2012.
NicholasVakhania, VazhaTarieladze, andSChobanyan. Probability distributions on Banach
spaces, volume 14. Springer Science & Business Media, 1987.
Alex H Williams, Erin Kunz, Simon Kornblith, and Scott Linderman. Generalized shape
metrics on neural representations.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:4738–4750, 2021.
Christopher Williams. Computing with inﬁnite networks.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 9, 1996.
Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Edward Moroshko, Pedro Savarese, Itay
Golan, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Kernel and rich regimes in overparametrized
models. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 3635–3673. PMLR, 2020.
Greg Yang and Edward J Hu. Tensor programs IV: Feature learning in inﬁnite-width neural
networks. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 11727–11737. PMLR,
2021.
Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi,
Nick Ryder, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs V:
Tuning large neural networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.
Xiyu Yu, Tongliang Liu, Xinchao Wang, and Dacheng Tao. On compressing deep models by
low rank and sparse decomposition. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 7370–7379, 2017.
John Zarka, Florentin Guth, and Stephane Mallat. Separation and concentration in deep
networks. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2021.
59