

===== PAGE 1 =====
Are Emergent Abilities in Large Language Models just In-Context
Learning?
Sheng Lu1*, Irina Bigoulaeva1*, Rachneet Sachdeva1,
Harish Tayyar Madabushi2, and Iryna Gurevych1
1 Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab, Technical University of Darmstadt
2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Bath
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
htm43@bath.ac.uk
Abstract
Large language models, comprising billions of
parameters and pre-trained on extensive web-
scale corpora, have been claimed to acquire
certain capabilities without having been specif-
ically trained on them. These capabilities, re-
ferred to as “emergent abilities,” have been
a driving force in discussions regarding the
potentials and risks of language models. A
key challenge in evaluating emergent abilities
is that they are confounded by model compe-
tencies that arise through alternative prompt-
ing techniques, including in-context learning,
which is the ability of models to complete a task
based on a few examples. We present a novel
theory that explains emergent abilities, taking
into account their potential confounding factors,
and rigorously substantiate this theory through
over 1000 experiments. Our findings suggest
that purported emergent abilities are not truly
emergent, but result from a combination of in-
context learning, model memory, and linguistic
knowledge. Our work is a foundational step in
explaining language model performance, pro-
viding a template for their efficient use and clar-
ifying the paradox of their ability to excel in
some instances while faltering in others. Thus,
we demonstrate that their capabilities should
not be overestimated. 1
1 Introduction, Motivation and Context
One of the most captivating aspects of pre-trained
language models (PLMs) is their capacity to ac-
quire a wide range of knowledge across different
domains, while being trained primarily through
masked language modelling, a task requiring mod-
els to predict masked tokens in their input (Tenney
*Equal Contribution.
Accepted to ACL 2024. A longer version of this paper
is available at https://h-tayyarmadabushi.github.io/
Emergent_Abilities_and_in-Context_Learning/.
1Our code and data are available at https://github.
com/UKPLab/on-emergence and https://tudatalib.ulb.
tu-darmstadt.de/handle/tudatalib/3931.
et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2019). The diverse abil-
ities of PLMs can be categorised into two broad
types: formal linguistic abilities and functional lin-
guistic abilities. Formal linguistic abilities refer to
the understanding of language rules and patterns,
which PLMs, for example, BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) are known to excel at (Tenney et al., 2019;
Petroni et al., 2019). The latter category includes
a range of abilities akin to human cognition that
are necessary for real-world language use and com-
prehension, such as commonsense knowledge and
social awareness. While PLMs excel at formal lin-
guistic abilities, they have faced challenges in de-
veloping functional linguistic abilities (Mahowald
et al., 2023).
The introduction of Large Language Models
(LLMs), which are typically generative PLMs
scaled up to billions of parameters and trained on
vast, web-scale data corpora, is changing this land-
scape (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023a,b). Recent works indicate that
LLMs exhibit emergent abilities, as measured by
their above random performance without explicit
training on tasks, including those tasks that explic-
itly require some form of reasoning. An emergent
ability was first defined as an ability to solve a task
which is absent in smaller models, but present in
LLMs. This definition, introduced approximately
concurrently by two works (Wei et al., 2022b; Sri-
vastava et al., 2023), is based on the more general
definition of emergence in physics: “Emergence
is when quantitative changes in a system result
in qualitative changes in behaviour” (Anderson,
1972). Emergent abilities are implied due to LLMs’
capacity to perform above the random baseline on
the corresponding tasks without explicit training on
those same tasks. For example, the emergent ability
to understand social situations in LLMs is inferred
from LLMs’ performing well above the random
baseline on the Social IQA (Sap et al., 2019) task,
which serves to evaluate models’ emotional and
arXiv:2309.01809v2  [cs.CL]  15 Jul 2024


===== PAGE 2 =====
social intelligence and includes questions such as
“Carson was excited to wake up to attend school.
Why did he do this? Options: Take the big test, Go
to bed early, Just say hello to friend (correct)”.
1.1 Significance for Applications and Safety
While prior work on emergent abilities does not
explicitly make the distinction between formal and
functional linguistic abilities, the identification of
numerous functional linguistic capabilities holds
profound implications for both the potential and
safety of LLMs. The assumption that LLMs have
access to emergent functional linguistic abilities
significantly affects the way in which users interact
with and use these systems. Overreliance on these
perceived abilities can lead users to provide insuffi-
ciently detailed instructions, potentially resulting in
hallucinations and errors. If there are indeed multi-
ple functional linguistic abilities that emerge with
scale, it suggests that further scaling has the poten-
tial to unlock a wide array of additional abilities
which we cannot predict, especially since they tend
not to present themselves in smaller-scale mod-
els (Wei et al., 2022b). This inherent unpredictabil-
ity associated with emergent abilities holds sub-
stantial implications for the discussion surrounding
safety and security when utilising LLMs. Indeed,
it has been argued that these could include poten-
tially hazardous abilities, including reasoning and
planning (Hoffmann, 2023), thereby posing an ex-
istential threat to humanity (Bengio et al., 2023).
In this work, we refer to such potentially harmful
capabilities, as “latent hazardous abilities.”
It’s important to emphasise that the development
of linguistic proficiencies (i.e. formal linguistic
abilities) does not carry the potentials of this na-
ture. The same can be said for the capacity to
efficiently handle information retrieval tasks. The
real focus lies on potential capabilities relating to
functional linguistic abilities. However, it must be
emphasised that this does not include other dangers
posed through the misuse of these models, such as
the use of LLMs to generate fake news. Similarly,
we do not contend that future AI systems could
never pose an existential threat. Instead, we clarify
that, contrary to prevailing narratives, the evidence
from LLM abilities does not support this concern.
1.2 Abilities vs. Techniques
The scaling up of LLMs facilitates the acquisition
of diverse competencies, which can be grouped
into two categories: The first encompasses abili-
ties, already described. The second encompasses
various techniques, which LLMs can benefit from.
These techniques show less of an effect in smaller
models, but become progressively more effective
with scale. Among these techniques are in-context
learning and instruction-tuning. In-context learning
(ICL) is the technique wherein LLMs are provided
with a limited number of examples within the in-
put prompt itself (Brown et al., 2020). From these
examples, the model infers how to perform a spe-
cific task, responding appropriately to the question
posed by the prompt (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2023). Investigations into the theoretical underpin-
nings of ICL and its specific manifestation in LLMs
indicate that it might bear resemblance to the pro-
cess of fine-tuning models on the specific tasks for
which they are provided examples (Akyürek et al.,
2023; Dai et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2023;
Wei et al., 2023). Another technique exclusive
to LLMs is instructional fine-tuning, alternatively
known as instruction-tuning. This technique in-
volves fine-tuning LLMs on datasets of prompts
and their corresponding desired outputs, which en-
ables the models to follow explicit instructions in
prompts (Chung et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a;
Taori et al., 2023). Following previous work (Wei
et al., 2022b), we refer to these techniques, illus-
trated in Figure 3, as prompting techniques.
Significant to our investigation is the observation
that prompting techniques and emergent abilities
manifest within LLMs at a comparable scale. Fur-
thermore, ICL and instruction-tuning can be ob-
served in smaller-scale models, albeit to a lesser
degree, and are thus predictable. This predictability
means they are not ‘emergent’, nor do they pose
a threat, contrasting with the unpredictability and
potential risks associated with emergent abilities in
larger models. Considering this context, it becomes
imperative to ascertain the extent of these emergent
abilities in the absence of prompting techniques.
1.3 Fine-tuning, In-Context Learning, and
other Prompting Techniques
Artificial neural models have, for some time, ex-
hibited tremendous success on specific tasks when
trained on those tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019). PLMs in particular have demonstrated this
even when trained on just a few examples (Hofer
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; Gao et al., 2021). Such performance is not
considered “emergent”, precisely because models
are trained on that very task. Indeed, the fact that


===== PAGE 3 =====
LLMs are not trained on the tasks used in evaluat-
ing their emergent abilities is central to identifying
abilities which are truly emergent. The assertion
that achieving satisfactory performance on a given
task signifies the emergence of associated ‘abili-
ties’ hinges on the condition that models are not
explicitly trained for that specific task.
The recent insights indicating parallels between
ICL and explicit training suggest that the success
on a task through ICL, much like models trained
explicitly for task-solving, does not imply a model
inherently possessing that ability (Dai et al., 2023).
For example, it has been shown that ICL imple-
ments gradient descent implicitly and constructs a
function at inference time on regression problems
(Akyürek et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2023a), which may be related to gradient-based
meta-learning (von Oswald et al., 2023). Impor-
tantly, however, the specific mechanisms governing
ICL do not impact our argument: The fact of its
functionality suffices to underscore the necessity
of assessing emergent abilities in the absence of
ICL. Additionally, instruction-tuning datasets typ-
ically include several variations of an instruction
followed by the task input or context (see Figure
3). As such, we contend that the process of instruc-
tion fine-tuning potentially enables models to map
prompts to in-context examples (detailed in Sec-
tion 4), thereby utilising ICL to respond to prompts.
This would imply that the success of a model to
solve a task in this scenario also does not indicate
the emergence of the corresponding ability.
The safety issues associated with LLMs stem
from their ability to perform well above the random
baseline on tasks that cannot be solved through
memorisation and are indicative of certain ‘abil-
ities’, without explicit training on those tasks .
Therefore, recognising that prompts act as a form
of ‘training mechanism’ rather than simply a way
of interfacing with a model with inherent functional
linguistic abilities offers the potential to alter how
we use these models and deepen our understanding
of their capabilities and limitations. As such, it
is crucial to conduct an independent evaluation of
LLMs’ abilities, detached from ICL.
1.4 Research Questions and Contributions
Our research seeks to answer two pivotal questions:
Firstly, in light of ICL’s influence on perceived
emergent abilities in LLMs, which abilities are
truly emergent in the absence of ICL, including in-
structional tuning? Secondly, given LLMs’ capabil-
ity for ICL and the typical inclusion of instruction-
exemplar mappings in instruction-tuning datasets,
can we find evidence of the emergence of func-
tional linguistic abilities in instruction-tuned mod-
els? Or can ICL better explain their capabilities
and shortcomings?
Our primary contribution lies in demonstrating
the absence of emergent functional linguistic abili-
ties in LLMs when ICL is not a factor, thus demys-
tifying the true capabilities of LLMs and affirming
their safety, while additionally dispelling concerns
over potential latent hazardous abilities. Our sec-
ondary contributions include empirically testing
the hypothesis that instruction-tuned models’ ca-
pabilities stem from efficient ICL, thus offering an
explanation for LLMs’ abilities as stemming from
a combination of formal linguistic skills, vast infor-
mation retention and recall, and notably, ICL. By
identifying user-directable ICL, rather than intrin-
sic functional linguistic capabilities, as the mecha-
nism behind LLM performance, we lay out a frame-
work for more efficient use of these models, shed-
ding light on their capabilities and limitations.
2 Experimental Setup
In this section, we present an overview of our exper-
imental methods investigating emergent abilities in
the absence of ICL. We experiment with 20 models
across 22 tasks using two different settings. We use
four different evaluation metrics and additionally
run multiple tests for bias, including a manual anal-
ysis of our results. We present an overview of this
setup below, while details on the hyperparameters
and training regime are presented in Appendix C.
2.1 Models
We experiment with four model families: GPT,
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), Falcon2 and LLaMA (Tou-
vron et al., 2023a). We choose these model families,
since GPT and LLaMA have previously been found
to have emergent abilities, and Falcon is at the top
of LLM leaderboards at the time of writing. Finally,
we select T5 as it is an encoder-decoder model, and
its instruction-tuned version (Flan) is trained us-
ing an extensive instruction-tuning dataset. Table
1 enumerates the models that we use in our exper-
iments. The emergence of abilities in relation to
scale requires the evaluation of each model family
across a range of sizes (parameter counts), and so
we select models at different scales from each of
2See https://falconllm.tii.ae/index.html.


===== PAGE 4 =====
these families. Important to our inquiry is the hy-
pothesis that instructional tuning might indirectly
leverage ICL. In light of this possibility, we experi-
ment with both.
Model Instruction-Tuned Version Size
GPT-2 GPT-2-IT 117M
GPT-2-XL GPT-2-XL-IT 1.6B
GPT-J GPT-JT 6.7B
davinci text-davinci-001 175Btext-davinci-003
T5-small Flan-T5-small 60M
T5-large Flan-T5-large 770M
Falcon-7B Falcon-7B-Instruct 7B
Falcon-40B Falcon-40B-Instruct 40B
LLaMA-7B – 7B
LLaMA-13B – 13B
LLaMA-30B – 30B
Table 1: Details of the models used in the experiments.
2.2 Tasks
In selecting tasks to assess the emergence of abil-
ities, we base our selection on those tasks that
have been identified as emergent in GPT-3 by prior
works. We refer to these tasks as previously iden-
tified as emergent . Out of 17 such tasks in the
BIG-bench dataset (Srivastava et al., 2023), we
incorporate 14 into our study. Three tasks pre-
viously identified as emergent are excluded from
our analysis, because their generative nature made
them challenging to assess automatically in a man-
ner consistent with the other tasks. Additionally,
to create a baseline for comparison, we randomly
choose seven tasks from the same dataset that were
not previously identified as emergent. Finally, we
also include GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), which
comprises a set of grade-school mathematics word
problems and is noteworthy because even the latest
models struggle with this task.
Given that formal linguistic abilities and the ca-
pacity to efficiently handle information retrieval
tasks do not pose an existential threat, we manually
analyse the proficiency required to solve each of the
tasks we select. A full list of tasks, including their
memorisability and classification as functional or
formal linguistic abilities, is presented in Table 2.
We determine memorisability through a manual
analysis of 50 examples from each task. We pro-
vide details of our manual analysis and examples
from each task in the Appendix F.
2.3 Settings
We evaluate each model on each task using both the
few-shot and the zero-shot settings. When using
the few-shot setting, we use 5 in-context examples.
We note that the few-shot setting explicitly makes
use of ICL, whereas the zero-shot setting does not.
2.4 Evaluation Metrics
To account for the possibility that the outputs gener-
ated by non-instruction-tuned models do not match
the provided answer choices exactly, we addition-
ally evaluate using the metric BERTScore accuracy,
which calculates the semantic similarity between
the output text and the provided answer choices
using BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) to estimate
the model’s answer choice. In this setting, the an-
swer is considered correct if the generated answer
is most similar (semantic text similarity) to the cor-
rect answer choice, and incorrect if it is closer to
any of the others. The majority of the results we
present in our analysis are based on this evalua-
tion metric. It’s worth noting that this is akin to
selecting the answer where the model has exhibited
lowest perplexity. Since calculating this perplexity
for models that are exclusively accessible through
APIs is not practical, we adopt this alternative met-
ric. We opt for BERTScore over alternatives like
BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020) because the latter
are additionally trained to assess the fluency of the
output text, a factor which is not our focus, and
one that renders them computationally resource-
intensive. For tasks that require the output of a
number or a coded string (i.e., Modified arithmetic,
GSM8K, and Codenames), we limit our evaluation
to exact matching, as measuring semantic simi-
larity between numbers or coded strings does not
accurately reflect their proximity.
Additionally, given that recent work has indi-
cated that emergence might be a result of discrete
evaluation metrics (Schaeffer et al., 2023), we also
include string edit distance. Our investigation re-
veals that the the lack of emergence is consistent
across the metrics we use, and thus we do not use
continuous metrics in our analysis. Overall, we
evaluate using exact match accuracy, BERTScore
accuracy, and string edit distance.
2.5 Control for Bias and Manual Evaluation
In order to ensure that our evaluation is fair, we
identify potential biases that could influence our
findings and design our experiments to mitigate


===== PAGE 5 =====
such biases. First, to ensure that non-instruction-
tuned models are not disadvantaged by the typi-
cally instructional task prompts, we modify these
prompts, by refining them to ensure their solvabil-
ity even in the absence of instruction comprehen-
sion. We then experiment with minor variations to
these prompts to find the most optimal format. We
also experiment with using the shortened output
format, where models are only required to output
a letter associated with the correct answer. We do
this to remove the dependence on the non-exact-
match evaluation metrics. Importantly, we manu-
ally evaluate the output of our models to ensure that
the prompts where appropriately interpreted by the
models, especially those which are not instruction
tuned. Details of these experiments and associated
results are presented in Appendix B.1.
3 Emergence in GPT in the Absence of
In-Context Learning
In this and the next section, we highlight a subset
of the results with the goal of highlighting the key
findings and trends from our experiments. Specifi-
cally, this section deals with the emergence of func-
tional linguistic abilities in non-instruction-tuned
models, and the next section (Section 4) focuses
on exploring instruction-tuned models and their
interplay with ICL and emergent abilities. Consid-
ering that prior research has identified emergent
abilities in GPTwe prioritise the GPT family in our
experimental analysis.
Figure 1 illustrates the performance of non-
instruction-tuned models from the GPT family in
the setting where they are prompted without the
use of in-context examples (zero-shot). This ap-
proach guarantees the exclusion of ICL, allowing
for a clear assessment of emergent abilities. Tasks
listed in the first row against a grey background are
tasks which have not been found to be emergent by
prior work and the rest are those which have been
found to be emergent previously.
Recall that the definition of emergence (Wei
et al., 2022b) requires LLMs to perform a task
above the baseline and do so in a manner that
cannot be predicted based on the performance of
smaller models. An analysis of Figure 1, presented
in Table 2 indicates that just two tasks are “emer-
gent” when we control for ICL. While two addi-
tional tasks (Misconceptions and Strategy QA) also
have unpredictable above-baseline performance,
the improvement is only marginal, as these tasks
are binary classification tasks with a random base-
line of 50% accuracy. Among the two identified
tasks, Nonsense words grammar pertains to a for-
mal linguistic ability, which we have noted does
not involve any latent hazardous abilities such as
reasoning. The other task, Hindu knowledge, solely
relies on information recall and likewise does not
demand any reasoning. As such, we find no func-
tional linguistic abilities emergent in davinci, the
non-instruction-tuned 175B GPT model in the ab-
sence of ICL.
3.1 Experimental Integrity and
Generalisability
To validate our experimental framework, partic-
ularly the use of BERTScore accuracy and our
modifications to prompts, we conduct validity tests.
These involve the evaluation of instruction-tuned
models with in-context examples included in the
prompts, referred to as the few-shot setting, thereby
enabling ICL in line with the experimental designs
of prior work. The results of these tests replicated
previous findings, confirming that our experimental
framework does not hinder the potential for detect-
ing emergent abilities.
Since our findings rely on the use of LLMs that
have not been instruction-tuned, we verify that the
observed lower performance on tasks does not stem
from the automatic metric (BERTScore) failing to
evaluate model responses adequately. Specifically,
if the model generates an answer that is correct,
but does not align with the correct target option,
BERTScore accuracy might fail to provide a reli-
able assessment. To this end, we conducted a post-
hoc analysis by manually examining a subset of 50
outputs of non-instruction-tuned models from each
task. Our focus was identifying instances where
BERTScore accuracy failed to recognise correct
responses (false negatives). Notice that false posi-
tives would not lead to an underestimation of model
performance, and so have a lesser impact on our
ability to identify emergence. A comprehensive
description of the analysis is included in Appendix
B.3. Our findings reinforce the notion that limita-
tions – inherent to all automatic evaluation – do not
detract from the overall validity of our results.
Similarly, we perform other checks for potential
aspects of our experimental setup that could lead to
confounding effects in our results. These include
manual analysis of model outputs to ensure the our
prompts were interpreted correctly (Appendix B.3),
and the use of shortened outputs to enable easier


===== PAGE 6 =====
Figure 1: Performance of non-instruction-tuned GPT models in the zero-shot setting. Grey background indicates
tasks that are not previously identified as emergent. Tasks that require the output of a number or a coded string are
evaluated using exact match accuracy. Note the consistent lack of “emergence”, see text for details.
Task Competence Type Memorizable > Random Baseline Predictable Emergent
Causal judgement Functional 0 No - No
English Proverbs Functional 0 No - No
Implicatures Functional 0 Yes Yes No
NS words grammar Formal 38 Yes No Yes
Rhyming Formal 50 No - No
Tracking shuffled obj. Functional 0 No - No
Commonsense QA Functional 3 Yes Yes No
GSM8K Functional 0 No - No
Analytic entailment Functional 4 Yes Yes No
Codenames Functional 0 No - No
Common morpheme Formal 0 Yes Yes No
Fact checker Functional 50 Yes Yes No
FoS detection Functional 0 No - No
Hindu knowledge Functional 50 Yes No Yes
Logical deduction Functional 0 No - No
Misconceptions Functional 50 Yes* No Yes
Mod. arithmetic Functional 0 No - No
Phrase relatedness Functional 50 Yes Yes No
Physical intuition Functional 50 Yes Yes No
Social IQA Functional 0 Yes Yes No
Strange stories Functional 0 Yes Yes No
Strategy QA Functional 27 Yes* No Yes
Table 2: An overview of the tasks and a categorisation as formal or functional ( Competence Type). The first 8
tasks are not previously identified to be emergent. For each task, we manually determine how many of 50 examples
can be solved through memorisation (Memorisable). For a task to be Emergent, models must perform above the
baseline (> Random Baseline) and the performance of the larger models must not be predictable based on that of
smaller models (Predictable). This table is based on the zero-shot performance of the non-instruction-tuned 175B
GPT-3 model davinci. * indicates that the increase above the random baseline is less than 5%.
evaluation (Appendix B.2).
Finally, to ensure generalisability of our results,
we extend our analysis to the LLaMA, Falcon, and
T5 model families. Across each of these cases,
a consistent pattern emerges: either task perfor-
mance is predictable based on smaller model per-


===== PAGE 7 =====
formance, or the performance is below the baseline.
Overall, our analysis indicates that our experimen-
tal settings do not adversely affect our capacity
to identify emergent abilities and our findings are
generalisable across various model families.
4 Instruction-Tuning as Implicit
In-Context Learning
The remarkable performance of instruction-tuned
models cannot be solely attributed to their pre-
training objective, which is to predict the next most
probable token. This observation has led to the
conjecture that models gain emergent functional
linguistic abilities, such as reasoning (Wei et al.,
2022c). Nevertheless, LLMs exhibit several limita-
tions that are at odds with this view: namely, their
known sensitivity to minor prompt variations and
their tendency to hallucinate. This leads us to hy-
pothesise that the primary mechanism underlying
the capabilities of instruction-tuned models may
in fact be an indirect form of ICL, which we call
‘implicit in-context learning’. This section presents
experimental results aimed at discerning whether
this is the more plausible explanation underlying
the performance of instruction-tuned LLMs.
Our evaluation in this section focuses on task
solvability rather than performance. This is be-
cause the (sometimes wide) variation in parameter
counts, architectures, and the pre-training data of
the models we compare would necessarily mean
that performance may differ across models. How-
ever, assessing task solvability offers a clearer in-
sight into emergent abilities within the models. We
utilise the previously-introduced BERTScore accu-
racy for all scenarios and evaluate models across
the same 22 selected tasks previously outlined in
Table 2. In this setup, unlike the previous one, we
only make use of non-instruction-tuned models in
the setting wherein we provide examples in-context
(few-shot), thereby eliminating concerns about the
models’ comprehension of task requirements.
4.1 Comparative Analysis of Initial Tasks
In discerning the more plausible explanation under-
lying the performance of instruction-tuned LLMs,
our experiments are designed to yield differing out-
comes based on whether models exhibit functional
linguistic abilities or rely predominantly on ICL.
Specifically, we draw a comparison between
the tasks that GPT-J (non-instruction-tuned, 6.7B)
can successfully address in the few-shot setting,
and those that can be solved by Flan-T5-large
(instruction-tuned, 770M) in the zero-shot setting.
The choice of these models is also based on the
observation that there is no change in the model’s
performance between the zero-shot and few-shot
settings for Flan-T5-large, indicating that it is too
small for explicit ICL. On the other hand, we ob-
serve that there is a boost in performance across
tasks in the few-shot setting for GPT-J, which
indicates that it is capable of ICL. Notice that
our choice of models ensures that the model we
use to test which tasks can be solved using ICL
is not instruction-tuned, and the model which is
instruction-tuned is tested without in-context ex-
amples and also cannot explicitly access ICL. If
instruction-tuning leads to models being capable
of something fundamentally different from ICL
(for example, functional linguistic abilities), this
would result in no substantial overlap in the set
of tasks solvable solely through instruction-tuning
and the set of tasks addressable solely via ICL. This
comparison is presented in Figure 2. We exclude
Modified arithmetic from this analysis, as the task
is constructed in a manner that requires the use of
in-context demonstrations.
Note the substantive dissimilarity between the
two models we use: Flan-T5-large is an encoder-
decoder model and GPT-J is a decoder only model.
Additionally, they are trained on very different pre-
training datasets, one is instruction-tuned while
the other isn’t, and they have very different pa-
rameter counts. Despite these fundamental differ-
ences, there is a substantial overlap in both the tasks
where the two models exhibit above-baseline per-
formance, as well as an overlap in the performance
scores themselves. This overlap in the results un-
derscores a compelling argument – it is more likely
that instruction-tuning serves as a mechanism that
enables models to harness in-context capabilities
more effectively, rather than the models having
emergent reasoning abilities. There are exactly
five of the 21 tasks we test wherein one model per-
forms markedly above the random baseline while
the other does not. Indeed, some of the cases are ex-
pected: in the case of Hindu knowledge, which is a
recall-based task, GPT-J, which is larger than Flan-
T5-large, has an advantage and performs better.
Similarly, the highly instructional nature of the Co-
denames renders it particularly challenging fornon-
instruction-tuned models. Of the remaining three
tasks, the better-performing GPT-J only achieves
an improvement of 5% on Analytical entailment,


===== PAGE 8 =====
Figure 2: The substantial overlap of the tasks on which the two models perform above the random baseline is
noteworthy and indicates that instruction-tuning allows for the effective access of in-context capabilities rather than
leading to the emergence of functional linguistic abilities. See text for details.
which is binary classification. This leaves us with
just Logical deduction, where Flan-T5-large ben-
efits to some extent from the instructional nature
of the questions, and Implicatures, where GPT-J
achieves an accuracy of 59%.
4.2 Generalisability
To evaluate if our results generalise to a further
increase in model size and instruction-tuning data,
we compare the tasks that can be effectively tack-
led by Flan-T5-large with those by instruction-
tuned versions of the largest GPT models, i.e.,
text-davinci-001 and text-davinci-003 (ad-
ditionally trained extensively on program code). It
is important to note that these models have more
than 200 times the number of parameters present in
Flan-T5-large. We perform this comparison in the
zero-shot setting, thus allowing us to compare the
instruction-following capabilities of these models
without triggering their ICL capabilities, which we
know to increase markedly with scale.
This comparison allows us to answer the fol-
lowing questions: a) Does increased scale largely
impact the tasks on which models can perform
above the random baseline, and b) Does enhanced
instruction-tuning, including the incorporation of
program code as seen in text-davinci-003, pro-
vide an advantage in being able to perform above
the baseline on tasks? By limiting ourselves to the
zero-shot setting, we ensure that our results are
not affected by in-context capabilities, which we
know to increase significantly with scale. Our re-
sults indicate that neither scale nor the inclusion of
program code in instruction-tuning markedly alters
the task solvability of a model. There is a substan-
tial overlap in the tasks on which Flan-T5-large
performs above the baseline and those on which
text-davinci-001 and text-davinci-003 do:
16 of the 22 tasks we experiment with show this
congruence. This overlap, and in several instances
comparable performance across these diverse mod-
els, suggests that the effectiveness of instruction-
tuning is consistent regardless of model scale or
the nature of tuning datasets, in the absence of ex-
plicit ICL. Among non-overlapping tasks, certain
recall-based tasks are better handled by larger GPT
models due to their better recall abilities. These
results, illustrated in Figure 5, Appendix D, con-
firm that our hypothesis, namely that ‘implicit in-
context learning’ is likely the primary mechanism
in instruction-tuned LLMs, and that it is general-
isable across model sizes and various instruction-
tuning datasets. This also suggests that further
scaling will probably not alter this trend.
4.3 A Novel Theoretical Foundation
Based on our observations on the capabilities and
limitations of LLMs, we propose a novel alterna-
tive theory explaining why instruction-tuning helps
models perform better: we propose that instruction-
tuning enables models to map instructions to the
form required for ICL, thus allowing instruction-
tuned models to solve tasks using some implicit
form of ICL. Importantly, during this process, mod-
els could be directly making use of the same un-
derlying mechanism that makes ICL possible, just
in a different way than when the model explic-
itly makes use of ICL from examples provided
in the prompt. We call this use of ICL ‘implicit’
in-context learning. Performing such a mapping
would be relatively straightforward for a very large
model, especially given that this task format aligns


===== PAGE 9 =====
closely with the training process carried out during
instruction-tuning. Investigating the exact nature
of this mechanism is left for future work.
5 Related Work
Emergent Abilities An emergent ability was first
defined as an ability that is not present in smaller
models but is present in larger models (Wei et al.,
2022b). From a review of prior literature of LLMs
including GPT-3, PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023),
Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022), Gopher (Rae
et al., 2021) and LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022),
Wei et al. (2022b) identified a total of 67 emergent
abilities based on above-random performance of
LLMs on tasks designed to test those abilities from
the BIG-bench dataset (Srivastava et al., 2023), and
the Massive Multitask Language Understanding
Benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2020). Subsequent
studies have explored additional abilities emergent
in LLMs, such as Theory of Mind (Kosinski, 2023)
and cognitive biases (Itzhak et al., 2023). However,
Schaeffer et al. (2023) have previously questioned
the existence of emergent abilities, arguing that
emergence is likely to be a consequence of the
discrete evaluation metrics commonly employed
for assessing LLMs. Some (Wei et al., 2022b)
argue against this by pointing out that there are
tasks on which LLMs are able to perform well
above the random baseline where smaller models
can only perform below it, suggesting that these
abilities are still emergent and not just a conse-
quence of discrete evaluation metrics. Similarly,
several works (Biderman et al., 2023; Tefnik and
Kadlˇcík, 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023)
have explored the extent to which memory plays a
role in LLMs’ abilities.
In-Context Learning ICL is a learning paradigm
that has gained great popularity with the advent
of LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023).
ICL typically involves prompting an LLM with
in-context demonstrations, and offers a more in-
terpretable interface as well as greater computa-
tional efficiency compared to previous learning ap-
proaches (Dong et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023).
Notably, ICL has demonstrated strong performance
on various natural language tasks (Kojima et al.,
2022; Lampinen et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023).
In terms of the theoretical rationale for ICL in
LLMs, recent work indicates that it might share
similarities with fine-tuning, in that it might allow
models to “learn” from the examples presented in
their prompt (Dai et al., 2023). Similarly, it has
been shown that ICL implements gradient descent
implicitly and constructs a function at inference
time on regression problems (Akyürek et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a), which may
be related to gradient-based meta-learning (von Os-
wald et al., 2023). A line of work shows that ICL
is driven by the distributions of the pre-training
data (Chan et al., 2022; Hahn and Goyal, 2023).
Some other theoretical explorations attempt to ex-
plain ICL in terms of Bayesian inference (Xie et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b).
To the best of our knowledge, none of the pre-
vious evaluations of emergent abilities have been
conducted in a manner that explicitly distinguished
between the ICL and instruction-tuning settings
and prompting in the setting wherein these abilities
are not triggered.
6 Conclusions and Implications
We started with two hypotheses: a) That the emer-
gence of all previously-observed functional linguis-
tic abilities is a consequence of ICL, and b) That the
abilities which present themselves in instruction-
tuned LLMs is more likely to be indicative of
instruction-tuning resulting in implicit ICL, rather
than the emergence of functional linguistic abilities.
Our results confirmed both of these hypotheses.
The distinction between the ability to follow in-
structions and the inherent ability to solve a prob-
lem is a subtle but important one, and bears signifi-
cance to the methods employed in utilising LLMs
and the problems they are tasked with solving. Sim-
ple following of instructions without applying rea-
soning abilities produces output that is consistent
with the instructions, but might not make sense
on a logical or commonsense basis. This is re-
flected in the well-known phenomenon of ‘hallu-
cination’, in which an LLM produces fluent, but
factually incorrect output (Bang et al., 2023; Thorp,
2023) The ability to follow instructions does not
imply having reasoning abilities, and more impor-
tantly, it does not imply the possibility of latent,
potentially-dangerous abilities. Additionally, these
observations imply that our findings hold true for
any model which exhibits a propensity for halluci-
nation or requires prompt engineering, including
those with greater complexity, regardless of scale
or number of modalities, such as GPT-4. By con-
tributing to a deeper understanding of these mod-
els’ abilities and limitations, we help to demystify


===== PAGE 10 =====
LLMs, alleviate their related safety concerns, and
lay out a framework for their more efficient use.
Limitations
Although we experiment on an extensive amount
of model sizes across various architectures (e.g.,
T5, GPT, Falcon, LLaMA), we were unable to en-
sure an exact match of parameter counts across the
different architectures. This is due to the variation
in the publicly-available releases of these models.
In this work, we used all models at the parame-
ter counts that were available. However, another
alternative would be to conduct pre-training to en-
sure equal parameter counts and comparable pre-
training data, though this would involve a substan-
tial computational investment. In all tasks, there is
a risk of data leakage, especially for LLMs whose
training datasets are not publicly known. In this
work, we assume that data leakage has not occurred
beyond what was reported in official publications
for specific models (e.g., BIG-bench for GPT-4).
As such, we do not consider data leakage a factor
when we consider a task to be ‘memory-based’,
although, in practice, the presence of data leakage
can have a biasing effect on model performance.
Our experiments are limited to English tasks. This
is primarily a consequence of previous work on
emergent abilities and on the limitations of com-
putational budget to run experiments on other lan-
guages. We intend to focus future work on datasets
that include other languages including low resource
languages.
Ethical Considerations
Our work does not imply that LLMs have abso-
lutely no potential for harm. By leveraging the
sophisticated linguistic capabilities of LLMs, ma-
licious actors can craft highly convincing and per-
sonalised fake news articles or phishing messages,
which may become increasingly difficult to dis-
tinguish from legitimate messages. The ease and
efficiency with which LLMs can be used for these
purposes highlight the need for detection mecha-
nisms, along with ethical guidelines to mitigate
the risks and protect individuals and democratic
processes. Similarly, identifying that LLM capabil-
ities are not a precursor to an AI-driven existential
threat does not eliminate the need for ongoing vig-
ilance in AI safety research. Our findings present
an unique opportunity to prioritise the most press-
ing aspects of LLM safety while simultaneously
exploring research avenues beyond mere scaling
up.
We recognise that the conversation about LLMs’
capabilities and limitations plays a crucial role in
the broader social discourse on AI. This under-
scores the importance of thoughtful consideration
and a high degree of care in all related research and
publication efforts.
Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the LOEWE Dis-
tinguished Chair “Ubiquitous Knowledge Process-
ing”, LOEWE initiative, Hesse, Germany (Grant
Number: LOEWE/4a//519/05/00.002(0002)/81).
This research work has been funded by the Ger-
man Federal Ministry of Education and Research
and the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Re-
search, Science and the Arts within their joint sup-
port of the National Research Center for Applied
Cybersecurity ATHENE. We would also like to
thank the Early Career Research grant from the
University of Bath. This work would not have been
possible without the generous grant from the Mi-
crosoft Accelerate Foundation Models Academic
Research fund, which allowed us to experiment
extensively with the Azure OpenAI service.
References
Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas,
Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. 2023. What learn-
ing algorithm is in-context learning? investigations
with linear models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.
Philip W Anderson. 1972. More is different: Broken
symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure
of science. Science, 177(4047):393–396.
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wen-
liang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia, Ziwei
Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, Quyet V . Do, Yan
Xu, and Pascale Fung. 2023. A multitask, multilin-
gual, multimodal evaluation of chatgpt on reasoning,
hallucination, and interactivity. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing and the 3rd Conference of the
Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, IJCNLP 2023 -Volume 1: Long
Papers, Nusa Dua, Bali, November 1 - 4, 2023, pages
675–718. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey E. Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn
Song, Pieter Abbeel, Yuval Noah Harari, Ya-Qin
Zhang, Lan Xue, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Gillian K.
Hadfield, Jeff Clune, Tegan Maharaj, Frank Hutter,


===== PAGE 11 =====
Atilim Günes Baydin, Sheila A. McIlraith, Qiqi Gao,
Ashwin Acharya, David Krueger, Anca D. Dragan,
Philip H. S. Torr, Stuart Russell, Daniel Kahneman,
Jan Brauner, and Sören Mindermann. 2023. Man-
aging AI risks in an era of rapid progress. CoRR,
abs/2310.17688.
Stella Biderman, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Lintang
Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony,
Shivanshu Purohit, and Edward Raff. 2023. Emer-
gent and predictable memorization in large language
models. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023,
New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020, virtual.
Stephanie C. Y . Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K.
Lampinen, Jane X. Wang, Aaditya K. Singh, Pierre H.
Richemond, James L. McClelland, and Felix Hill.
2022. Data distributional properties drive emergent
in-context learning in transformers. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,
November 28 - December 9, 2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vin-
odkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia,
Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,
Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, An-
drew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pil-
lai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira,
Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy
Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
and Noah Fiedel. 2023. Palm: Scaling language mod-
eling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 24:240:1–240:113.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret
Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi Wang,
Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Web-
son, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suz-
gun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan
Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Y . Zhao,
Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Hongkun Yu, Slav
Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam
Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V . Le, and Jason Wei.
2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
CoRR, abs/2210.11416.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-
lems. CoRR, abs/2110.14168.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming
Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. 2023. Why can GPT
learn in-context? language models secretly perform
gradient descent as meta-optimizers. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2023, pages 4005–4019, Toronto, Canada. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong
Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, Lei Li, and
Zhifang Sui. 2023. A survey for in-context learning.
CoRR, abs/2301.00234.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. 2021.
Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1:
Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pages
3816–3830. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Michael Hahn and Navin Goyal. 2023. A theory of
emergent in-context learning as implicit structure
induction. CoRR, abs/2303.07971.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou,
Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
2020. Measuring massive multitask language under-
standing. CoRR, abs/2009.03300.
Maximilian Hofer, Andrey Kormilitzin, Paul W. Gold-
berg, and Alejo J. Nevado-Holgado. 2018. Few-shot


===== PAGE 12 =====
learning for named entity recognition in medical text.
CoRR, abs/1811.05468.
Christian Hugo Hoffmann. 2023. A philosophical view
on singularity and strong AI. AI Soc., 38(4):1697–
1714.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch,
Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes
Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland,
Katherine Millican, George van den Driessche, Bog-
dan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen
Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Oriol Vinyals, Jack W. Rae,
and Laurent Sifre. 2022. An empirical analysis of
compute-optimal large language model training. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans,
LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022.
Itay Itzhak, Gabriel Stanovsky, Nir Rosenfeld, and
Yonatan Belinkov. 2023. Instructed to bias:
Instruction-tuned language models exhibit emergent
cognitive bias. CoRR, abs/2308.00225.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: An-
nual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,
November 28 - December 9, 2022.
Michal Kosinski. 2023. Theory of mind may have spon-
taneously emerged in large language models. CoRR,
abs/2302.02083.
Andrew Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie Chan,
Kory Mathewson, Mh Tessler, Antonia Creswell,
James McClelland, Jane Wang, and Felix Hill. 2022.
Can language models learn from explanations in con-
text? In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 537–563,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yingcong Li, Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz, Dimitris Pa-
pailiopoulos, and Samet Oymak. 2023. Transform-
ers as algorithms: Generalization and stability in
in-context learning. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023,
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 19565–19594.
PMLR.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang,
Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Pre-
train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of
prompting methods in natural language processing.
ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):195:1–195:35.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. CoRR, abs/1907.11692.
Kyle Mahowald, Anna A. Ivanova, Idan Asher Blank,
Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and
Evelina Fedorenko. 2023. Dissociating language
and thought in large language models: a cognitive
perspective. CoRR, abs/2301.06627.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as knowl-
edge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
blog, 1(8):9.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie
Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susan-
nah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan, Ja-
cob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George
van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Mari-
beth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Jo-
hannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron Huang,
Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia
Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu, Erich Elsen, Sid-
dhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Bud-
den, Esme Sutherland, Karen Simonyan, Michela Pa-
ganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine
Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena
Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou,
Arthur Mensch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsim-
poukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sot-
tiaux, Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong,
Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia
Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin,
Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Chris
Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew J. Johnson, Blake A.
Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William
Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura
Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub,
Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Ko-
ray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. 2021. Scaling
language models: Methods, analysis & insights from
training gopher. CoRR, abs/2112.11446.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-
ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
21(140):1–67.
Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan
Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2019. Social IQa: Com-
monsense reasoning about social interactions. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4463–


===== PAGE 13 =====
4473, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo.
2023. Are emergent abilities of large language mod-
els a mirage? In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS
2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
2023.
Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P. Parikh.
2020. BLEURT: learning robust metrics for text
generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 7881–7892.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao,
Abu Awal Md Shoeb, and et al. Abubakar Abid. 2023.
Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrap-
olating the capabilities of language models. Transac-
tions on Machine Learning Research.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann
Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang,
and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. 2023. Alpaca: A
strong, replicable instruction-following model. Stan-
ford Center for Research on Foundation Models.
https://crfm. stanford. edu/2023/03/13/alpaca. html,
3(6):7.
Michal Tefnik and Marek Kadlˇcík. 2023. Can in-context
learners learn a reasoning concept from demonstra-
tions? In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Reasoning and Structured Explana-
tions (NLRSE), pages 107–115.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang,
Adam Poliak, R. Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R. Bowman, Dipanjan
Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. What do you learn from
context? probing for sentence structure in contextu-
alized word representations. In 7th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019,
New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 . OpenRe-
view.net.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng,
Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao
Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
Maarten Bosma, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang,
Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S.
Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee
Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny So-
raker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Ale-
jandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew
Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Co-
hen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Agüera
y Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and
Quoc Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog
applications. CoRR, abs/2201.08239.
H. Holden Thorp. 2023. Chatgpt is fun, but not an
author. Science, 379(6630):313–313.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023a. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. CoRR,
abs/2302.13971.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton-
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and
fine-tuned chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288.
Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Ran-
dazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander Mordvintsev, An-
drey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. 2023. Trans-
formers learn in-context by gradient descent. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, vol-
ume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 35151–35174. PMLR.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y . Zhao, Kelvin
Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
drew M. Dai, and Quoc V . Le. 2022a. Finetuned
language models are zero-shot learners. In The Tenth
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
OpenReview.net.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022b. Emer-
gent abilities of large language models. Transactions
on Machine Learning Research.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V . Le,


===== PAGE 14 =====
and Denny Zhou. 2022c. Chain-of-thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans,
LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022.
Jerry W. Wei, Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Dustin Tran, Al-
bert Webson, Yifeng Lu, Xinyun Chen, Hanxiao
Liu, Da Huang, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. 2023.
Larger language models do in-context learning dif-
ferently. CoRR, abs/2303.03846.
Zhaofeng Wu, Linlu Qiu, Alexis Ross, Ekin Akyürek,
Boyuan Chen, Bailin Wang, Najoung Kim, Jacob
Andreas, and Yoon Kim. 2023. Reasoning or recit-
ing? exploring the capabilities and limitations of lan-
guage models through counterfactual tasks. CoRR,
abs/2307.02477.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang,
and Tengyu Ma. 2022. An explanation of in-context
learning as implicit bayesian inference. In The Tenth
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022.
OpenReview.net.
Ruiqi Zhang, Spencer Frei, and Peter L. Bartlett. 2023a.
Trained transformers learn linear models in-context.
CoRR, abs/2306.09927.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Evalu-
ating text generation with BERT. In8th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenRe-
view.net.
Yufeng Zhang, Fengzhuo Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and
Zhaoran Wang. 2023b. What and how does in-
context learning learn? bayesian model averag-
ing, parameterization, and generalization. CoRR,
abs/2305.19420.
Shen Zheng, Jie Huang, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang.
2023. Why does chatgpt fall short in answering ques-
tions faithfully? CoRR, abs/2304.10513.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han,
Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy
Ba. 2023. Large language models are human-level
prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.


===== PAGE 15 =====
A In-Context Learning and Instruction-Tuning
Figure 3: The figure on the left depicts prompting using ICL, where the model infers the task and the patterns based
on a few examples. The figure on the right presents a few of the templates used to generate instruction fine-tuning
data which models are fine-tuned on to allow them to better interpret prompts. The task depicted in these examples
is Analytical entailment and the templates are from the Flan instruction fine-tuning dataset (Wei et al., 2022a).
B Controls for Possible Bias
In order to ensure that our evaluation is fair, we identify potential biases that could influence our findings
and design our experiments to mitigate such biases. In cases where this is not possible, we shape our
experiments to maximise our chances of identifying emergent abilities, if they do indeed exist.
B.1 Prompt Formats
Prompt format Example
default, closed
Question: Austin’s family was celebrating their parents 50th
anniversary during dinner at a new restaurant. What would
Austin’s family do next? From the following choices, choose
the correct answer: “Refuse to eat dinner with the family”, “Eat
dinner at the restaurant”, “Happy”
Answer:
completion, open
Austin’s family was celebrating their parents 50th anniversary
during dinner at a new restaurant. What would Austin’s family
do next? The correct answer is
completion, closed
Austin’s family was celebrating their parents 50th anniversary
during dinner at a new restaurant. What would Austin’s family
do next? The possible answers are “Refuse to eat dinner with the
family”, “Happy”, “Eat dinner at the restaurant”, but the correct
answer is
adversarial, closed
Question: Austin’s family was celebrating their parents 50th
anniversary during dinner at a new restaurant. What would
Austin’s family do next?
Options: (a) “Refuse to eat dinner with the family”, (b) “Eat
dinner at the restaurant”, (c) “Happy”
Answer:
Table 3: Sample prompts of the three formats we use. The samples are from the Social IQA task of BIG-bench.
Table 3 shows an example of each of our prompt formats. We make two important changes to the
prompting strategies used: First we refine all prompts to ensure their solvability even in the absence of
instruction comprehension. We call this adjusted prompt format the completion-style prompt, and use it


===== PAGE 16 =====
for all models (See Table 3). We experiment with minor variations to these prompts so as to find the most
optimal format.
This change is necessary, since in order to assess the true abilities of non-instruction-tuned models
in the zero-shot setting, it is imperative to evaluate their ability to accurately perform tasks without
relying on explicit instructions. Many of the tasks presented in Section 2.2 (Tasks) involve prompts
that inherently require an understanding of explicit instructions. Since LLMs in their base form are
trained to perform next-word prediction, it is unreasonable to expect that without instruction-tuning,
they will respond adequately to multiple choice question prompts requiring them to pick the correct
answer from a set of options. We hypothesised that using such a prompt style would give an unequal
advantage to the instruction-tuned models. Indeed, our initial prompt experiments demonstrated that
non-instruction-tuned models merely try to “complete” the text of the prompt by generating additional
answer choices, sometimes even additional new questions. However, once the prompt itself was adjusted
to take the form of a sentence to be completed, non-instruction-tuned models were likelier to output one
of the answer choices. We confirm that these changes do not skew our results by replicating prior results
using instruction-tuned models, which we use as a baseline.
The second change we make to our prompting strategy involves the exploration of two types of
completion-style prompts: closed and open. In the closed prompt format, we provide answer choices
alongside the prompt, while in the open prompt format, the answer choices are withheld. We find that
when models are prompted using the open prompt strategy, their generated results often exhibit little or no
resemblance to the provided answer choices. Consequently, evaluating the correctness of the generated
answers becomes challenging. As a result, experiments utilising the open prompt setting are completely
excluded from our analysis. However, we provide access to these responses in the data accompanying this
study, allowing other researchers to experiment with it.
B.2 Validation through Shortened output Generation
LLMs lacking instruction-tuning often exhibit a degree of proficiency in adhering to instructions, albeit
within constrained limits, particularly in the context of models with a substantial parameter count of
175B (Wei et al., 2022a). We leverage this phenomenon by using the “adversarial prompt setting”, wherein
the model is required to generate output choices, such as options “a” or “b” instead of the target choice.
In this setting we evaluate models using a relaxed version of exact match wherein an answer is marked
correct if it contains the correct target option. This flexibility is once again designed to allow us to detect
any possible indication of emergence. Note that this assessment allows us to circumvent the necessity for
employing less precise evaluation criteria as is required when evaluating more verbose responses. The
results of this evaluation on the seven of 22 tasks wherein the performance is above the random baseline
are presented in Figure 4.
Of these seven tasks on which the non-instruction-tuned version of GPT-3 performs above the random
baseline, three are predictable based on the performance of smaller models and thus not considered
emergent. The only task on which the improvement over the baseline is not predictable and notable is
‘physical intuition.’ This task includes questions such as “The bonds in sodium chloride are of what type?
Options: Ionic: 1, Covalent: 0, Metallic: 0, Hydrogen: 0”, which are likely to be more memory based.
Common morpheme, on the other hand, is a non-trivial task that require ‘reasoning’ abilities. However, we
find that it has an extremely small test set with only fifty examples and thus the improvement in accuracy
is only a small fraction of the total. As such, even in this setting, where we need not employ the less
precise evaluation criteria, we find no evidence for the emergence of functional linguistic abilities.
B.3 Manual Evaluation of Responses
To ensure that our results are not biased, we present here a manual analysis of 50 output examples from
each task, the results of which is presented in Table 4. Recall that modified arithmetic, GSM8K, and
codenames are always evaluated using exact match accuracy and so are not included in this analysis.
In Table 4, ‘BERTScore accuracy %’ represents the percentage of correct answers as determined by the
automatic metric of the 50 examples selected for manual evaluation and ‘manual evaluation accuracy %’
represents the percentage of correct answers as determined by a manual analysis of the results by one


===== PAGE 17 =====
Figure 4: Performance of non-instruction-tuned GPT models using the adversarial prompt on the subset of tasks
wherein the performance is above the random baseline. The subplot with grey background indicates that the task is
not previously identified to be emergent. The performance on Codenames, Phrase relatedness, and Strange stories is
predictable and so not emergent. Across the remaining tasks, the improvements in performance compared to the
random baseline are relatively modest. Additionally, of the tasks on which the performance gain is slightly more
notable, we find that Physical intuition is a memory intensive task and Common morpheme has a small test set.
Task BSA% MA% Base%
Analytic entailment 48 14 48
Common morpheme 32 22 27
English proverbs 10 6 20
Fact checker 52 34 49
Figure of speech detection 10 10 9
Hindu knowledge 52 54 25
Implicatures 58 6 48
Misconceptions 48 40 47
Nonsense words grammar 34 22 24
Phrase relatedness 44 34 24
Physical intuition 46 40 26
Rhyming 16 6 21
Social IQA 36 38 34
Strategy QA 58 58 49
Tracking shuffled objects 34 20 32
Strange stories 34 28 21
Logical deduction 26 34 33
Causal judgement 46 56 54
Commonsense QA 36 54 20
Table 4: A comparison of BERTScore Accuracy ( BSA%) and a manual evaluation accuracy ( MA%) on 50
examples from each task. The analysis reveals that in instances of notable disparity, BERTScore accuracy generally
tends to result in false positives (top block). In exactly three cases BERTScore accuracy underestimates performance:
in two instances the increase allows model performance to increase above the baseline only marginally. In the
case of Logical deduction, the model sometimes produces answers that are copied from the question but are still
technically correct answers, which could lead to the MA% score being too lenient. In the case of Causal judgement,
the increase is only slight compared to the above 50% baseline. Where there is a substantial performance boost
above the baseline (bottom block), this particular task’s predictability based on smaller model performance implies
that it remains not emergent. As such, we find that even a lenient manual scoring does not affect our conclusion.
of the authors on the same set of examples. Recall that the purpose of this exercise is to ensure that the
automatic evaluation metric does not affect our conclusion in terms of the existence of emergent abilities.
Our analysis shows that, in the majority of cases, the automatic metric overestimates model performance.
This set of tasks is represented in the top block in Table 4.
In the case of Logical deduction, the model sometimes produces answers that are copied from the
question but are still technically correct answers, which could lead to the MA% score being too lenient.


===== PAGE 18 =====
In the case of Casual judgement, the increase is only slight compared to the above 50% baseline. These
two cases wherein the manual evalution indicates a higher scores are represented in Table 4 block 2.
Finally, on ‘Commonsense QA’, the only task where there is a marked increase over the baseline, such
performance is predictable based on the performance of smaller models, and so the task is not emergent.
This analysis of 50 examples from each task carries a degree of imprecision. Crucially, however, it is
imperative to recognise that our primary objective is to ensure that these inaccuracies, inherent to the
automatic evaluation of generative models, do not fundamentally alter our conclusions. Our analysis
underscores that this is the case and that these limitations do not undermine the validity of our findings.
Similarly, we study the output of non-instruction-tuned models to ensure that they are able to interpret
the instructions in the questions. Our qualitative analysis points to them indeed being able to interpret task
requirements. For example, in the ‘Causal judgement’ task, models produce ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers, as
required by the task. Additionally, we note the above-baseline performance of the non-instruction-tuned
models on some tasks, albeit not functional linguistic tasks, which further lends support to the notion
that such models have access to information pertaining to task requirements, once again confirming the
validity of our findings.
C Experimental Setup
Model Tasks
GPT-2
All of the 22 selected tasks
GPT-2-IT
GPT-2-XL
GPT-2-XL-IT
GPT-J
GPT-JT
davinci
text-davinci-001
text-davinci-003
T5-small
Flan-T5-small
T5-large
Flan-T5-large
Falcon-7B
Logical deductions, Social IQA, GSM8K, Tracking shuffled objects
Falcon-7B-Instruct
Falcon-40B
Falcon-40B-Instruct
LLaMA-7B
LLaMA-13B
LLaMA-30B
Table 5: An overview of the experimental setup. Models in the GPT and T5 families are evaluated on all tasks
and those in the Falcon and LLaMA families on a subset of representative tasks. In addition, each evaluation is
performed in the closed and closed adversarial prompting strategies.
This section provides additional details of our experimental setup previously presented in Section
2. As discussed, we evaluate each of the 12 models selected from the T5 and GPT families (Section
2.1) on all of the 22 selected tasks, while those in the Falcon and LLaMA families are evaluated on a
subset of representative tasks, namely: Logical Deductions, Social IQA, GSM8K, and Tracking Shuffled
Objects.For each case, we employ the prompting strategies: closed, and closed adversarial, as discussed
in Section B.1. In addition, we evaluate each model and prompting strategy using both the few-shot
and the zero-shot settings. When using the few-shot setting, we use 5 in-context examples. To ensure
reproducibility, we use the test sets provided by the tasks. Statistics associated with the test sets are
included in the BIG-bench description 3. To consider the variability in responses, we conduct each
3https://github.com/google/BIG-bench


===== PAGE 19 =====
experiment three times and calculate the average result. All experiments that we run locally are run on
NVIDIA A100 GPUs using a temperature of 0.01 and a batch size of 16. Our locally-run experiments
took approximately between 8 and 12 hours per task, depending on the size of the test sets. In the case
of GPT-3 175B parameter models (davinci, text-davinci-001, and text-davinci-003), we make use of the
official API for evaluation which is done once using a temperature of 0 to aim for deterministic output.
The total cost of our API usage was approximately $1,500. While we restrict our evaluation to a single run
due to cost constraints, it’s improbable that this will impact the results of our experiments. This is because
we also set the temperature to 0, which guarantees result reproducibility and minimises the possibility of
hallucinations.
In addition, we evaluate six selected models from the LLaMA and Falcon families (see Section 2.1),
on four of the 22 tasks chosen earlier. We pick these four tasks ensuring that two have been previously
identified as emergent (Logical Deductions and Social IQA) and the other two have been determined to be
non-emergent (GSM8K and Tracking Shuffled Objects). Once again we test these using the closed and
adversarial prompting strategies and run each experiment thrice to account for variance. Lastly, to avoid
relying solely on discrete metrics for evaluating emergence, we employ four evaluation metrics: exact
match, BERTScore accuracy, continuous BERTScore, and edit distance, as described in Section 2.4.
In evaluating BERTScore accuracy, evaluate models based on the semantic similarity between the
output text and the provided answer choices using BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020)4
In terms of a random baseline, given the variable number of options associated with some of the tasks
under evaluation, we construct the baseline for each task by randomly selecting options for questions in
that task multiple times and finding an average score.
D Additional Results: Implicit In-Context Learning
Figure 5: A comparison of the performance of Flan-T5-large (zero-shot), GPT-J (few-shot), text-davinci-001
(zero-shot), and text-davinci-003 (zero-shot) using the completion prompt. The subplots with grey background
are results for tasks that are not previously identified to be emergent. Modified arithmetic is excluded from the
analysis, as the task is constructed in a manner that requires the use of in-context demonstrations. The substantial
overlap of the tasks on which the two models perform above the random baseline is noteworthy and indicates that
instruction-tuning allows for the effective access of in-context capabilities rather than leading to the emergence of
functional linguistic abilities.
4BERTScore V 0.3.13 using RoBERTa Large, 355M parameters, available at https://huggingface.co/FacebookAI/
roberta-large/commit/716877d372b884cad6d419d828bac6c85b3b18d9


===== PAGE 20 =====
E Detailed Task Information
In this section, we give a detailed overview of our chosen tasks. For each task, we provide the task
description and a selected example to illustrate the style of the questions and answers (Table 6 below).
Our choice of tasks includes those tasks which were found to be emergent in GPT-3, primarily from
BIG-bench. BIG-bench is licenced under the Apache-2.0 license, and our use of the dataset, based on
the license and the description of provided is consistent with its intended use. This dataset contains no
personally identifiable data and is designed to evaluate a range of reasoning and linguistic abilities in
LLMs.
Table 6: List of our chosen tasks along with their brief description and sample inputs.
Causal judgement This task tests whether large language models
can comprehend a short story that introduces
multiple cause-effect events.
Input: The CEO of a company...Did the CEO
intentionally harm the environment?
Options: Yes, No
Target: Yes
English proverbs This task asks models to find the English
proverb corresponding to a given story.
Input: Both Tim and John...Which of the
following proverbs best apply to this situation?
Options: “Ignorance is bliss”, “A bad thing
never dies”...
Target: Ignorance is bliss
Implicatures This task asks models to predict whether one
speaker’s answer to another counts as a yes or
as a no.
Input: Speaker 1: “But aren’t you afraid?”
Speaker 2: “Ma’am, sharks never attack
anybody.”
Options: Yes, No
Target: No
Nonsense words grammar This task requires the language model to guess
the grammatical role of nonsense words.
Input: Which word in the following sentence
is a verb? The grilshaws bolheavened
whincely.
Options: The, grilshaws, bolheavened,
whincely
Target: bolheavened
Rhyming This task measures how well language models
can understand rhyming in English.
Input: What rhymes with cruise?
Options: disaster, creates, disguise, listen,
crews
Target: crews
Tracking shuffled objects This task tests a model’s ability to work out the
final state of a system given its initial state and
a sequence of modifications.
Input: Alice, Bob, and Claire are playing a
game...At the end of the game, Alice has the
Options: “orange ball”, “white ball”, “blue
ball”
Target: blue ball
Commonsense QA This task requires the models to answer
commonsense questions based on their rich
prior knowledge.
Input: Sammy wanted to go to where the
people were. Where might he go?
Options: “race track”, “populated areas”...
Target: populated areas
GSM8K The dataset supports the task of question
answering on basic mathematical problems
that require multi-step reasoning.
Input: Weng earns $12...How much did she
earn?
Options: 13, 17, 10, 8, 25
Target: 10
Analytic entailment This task presents pairs of sentences and tests a
model’s ability to determine whether there is
linguistic entailment.
Input: Lina met two nurses. So, Lina met at
least one woman.
Options: entailment, no_entailment
Target: no_entailment
Codenames This task asks models to identify words
associated with a given word.
Input: Try to identify the 3 words best
associated with the word
INFRASTRUCTURE from the following list:
ant, genie, government, cable...
Target: ant, cable, government
Task Name Description Example
Continued on next page


===== PAGE 21 =====
Table 6: List of our chosen tasks along with their brief description and sample inputs. (Continued)
Common morpheme This task ask models to select the most likely
option for the meaning of the morpheme that is
common among an input list of words.
Input: What is the common morpheme among
these words: pyre, empyrean, antipyretic,
pyrotechnics
Options: fire, hot, oxygen, medicine
Target: fire
Fact checker This task tests models’ ability to evaluate
claims as true or false.
Input: On June 2017, the following claim was
made...
Question: Was this claim true or false?
Options: true, false
Target: true
Figure of speech detection This task asks a model to detect which figure
of speech is embodied by each of the example
English sentences/phrases shown.
Input: Please identify the figure of speech
embodied by the following English sentences.
Sentence: They fought like cats and dogs.
Options: Simile, Metaphor...
Target: Simile
Hindu knowledge This task asks models to answer questions
about Hindu mythology.
Input: In Hinduism, the principle deity
associated with creation is whom?
Options: Brahma, Shiva, Rama, Vishnu
Target: Brahma
Logical deduction This task requires deducing the order of a
sequence of objects from a minimal set of
conditions.
Input: On a shelf, there are three books...
Options: “The black book is the leftmost”...
Target: The black book is the leftmost
Misconceptions This task measures whether a model can
discern popular misconceptions from the truth.
Input: Twinkies are edible for decades or
longer.
Options: T, F
Target: F
Modified arithmetic This task asks a model to perform a
mathematical operation.
Input: In the following lines, the symbol ->
represents a simple mathematical operation.
102 + 435 -> 537...466 + 214 ->
Options: 672, 680, 686
Target: 680
Phrase relatedness This task presents models with a phrase
(n-gram), and asks them to select the most
related phrase (n-gram) among the choices.
Input: For each word or phrase, identify the
most related choice from the listed options.
home town
Options: “location”, “native city”...
Target: native city
Physical intuition This task asks models to deduce the physical
mechanism or behavior associated with a
physical system.
Input: A bug hits the windshield of a car.
Does the bug or the car accelerate more due to
the impact?
Options: Bug, Car, Neither
Target: Bug
Social IQA This task measures the ability of models to
reason about the common-sense implications
of social situations.
Input: Tracy didn’t go home that evening and
resisted Riley’s attacks. What does Tracy need
to do before this?
Target: “Make a new plan”, “Find somewhere
to go”...
Target: Find somewhere to go
Strange stories This task measures the emotional intelligence
of language models through a psychology test
with naturalistic short stories.
Input: At school today...
Question: How would Ben’s mom feel if she
later learned that John was not at school?
Options: worried, confused, fearful, joyful
Target: confused
Strategy QA This is a question-answering benchmark
focusing on open-domain questions where the
required reasoning steps are implicit in the
question and should be inferred using a
strategy.
Input: Is it common to see frost during some
college commencements?
Options: Yes, No
Target: Yes
Task Name Description Example


===== PAGE 22 =====
F Task Memorisability
As a qualitative analysis, we categorise each of our chosen tasks into one of the Cognitive Skills categories
from Mahowald et al. (2023), since these categories may shed light on what kinds of linguistic and/or
reasoning abilities are needed to understand a task. Additionally, we examine the degree of memorisability
of each task. We define a task as memorisable if a language model can conceivably achieve above-random
performance on it by simply repeating factual information from its memory. Importantly, this would
shortcut any reasoning path intended by the task, and performance would improve trivially as model size
increases. Thus, we argue that performance gains on such tasks are unlikely to indicate emergence.5
In this section, we show memorisable and non-memorisable examples from each of our chosen tasks,
to justify our evaluation of task memorisability from Section 3 (Emergence in GPT in the Absence of
In-Context Learning), Table 2. For tasks which contain no memorisable examples, or alternatively, no
non-memorisable examples, the corresponding cell is left blank. A short explanation for the categorisation
is provided below each example, in bold.
Table 7: Selected examples from each of our chosen tasks to justify our classification of memorisable vs. non-memorisable
tasks. Note that some tasks contain both memorisable and non-memorisable examples, which occur in varying ratios
as shown in Table 2. Additionally, for our categorisation, we assume that leakage of task data is not a factor, i.e., an
example is memorisable if and only if it can be solved through memory recall of information. We assume that previous
memorisation of the actual question-answer pair has not occurred.
Causal judgement n/a The CEO of a company is sitting in his office when his
Vice President of R&D comes in and says, “We are
thinking of starting a new programme. It will help us
increase profits, but it will also harm the environment.”
The CEO responds that he doesn’t care about harming
the environment and just wants to make as much profit
as possible. The programme is carried out, profits are
made and the environment is harmed. Did the CEO
intentionally harm the environment?
Reason: Human-aligned moral reasoning necessary.
English Proverbs n/a Vanessa spent lots of years helping out on weekends at
the center for homeless aid. Recently, when she lost her
job, the center was ready to offer a new job right away.
Which of the following proverbs best apply to this
situation?
Reason: Must connect a known proverb to a novel
situation.
Implicatures n/a Speaker 1: “Do you want to quit?”
Speaker 2: “I’ve never been the type of person who
throws in the towel when things get tough.”
Reason: Pragmatics reasoning necessary.
Nonsense words grammar Which word in the following sentence
is a verb? The grilshaws bolheavened
whincely.
Reason: Linguistically-typical suffixes
(i.e. -ed for a verb).
Which word in the following sentence is a verb? I’d
gralsillit onto the secure felisheret.
Reason: Linguistically-atypical suffixes (i.e. -it for a
verb).
Rhyming What rhymes with ’cruise’?
Reason: Model cannot rely on spelling
or audio; rhyme dictionary knowledge
necessary.
n/a
Task Example Memorisable Example Non-Memorisable
Continued on next page
5It is possible that, despite a task having high memorisability, a language model nevertheless goes through the intended
reasoning process to arrive at the answer. In this case, a memorisable task could be considered emergent. But in this case,
it would not be enough to merely show that performance improves with scale; one would also have to demonstrate that the
language model is indeed reasoning. We forgo such an analysis here, and merely note that scale-related performance gains on
highly-memorisable tasks are less likely to indicate emergence than non-memorisable tasks.


===== PAGE 23 =====
Table 7: Selected examples from each of our chosen tasks to justify our classification of memorisable vs. non-memorisable
tasks. Note that some tasks contain both memorisable and non-memorisable examples, which occur in varying ratios
as shown in Table 2. Additionally, for our categorisation, we assume that leakage of task data is not a factor, i.e., an
example is memorisable if and only if it can be solved through memory recall of information. We assume that previous
memorisation of the actual question-answer pair has not occurred. (Continued)
Tracking shuffled objects n/a Alice, Bob, and Claire are playing a game. At the start
of the game, they are each holding a ball: Alice has a
orange ball, Bob has a white ball, and Claire has a blue
ball...At the end of the game, Alice has the?
Reason: Novel scenarios; state tracking abilities
necessary.
Commonsense QA Google Maps and other highway and
street GPS services have replaced
what?
Reason: Model can extract the answer
from memorised articles about GPS
services.
Sammy wanted to go to where the people were. Where
might he go?
Reason: A novel, hypothetical scenario.
GSM8K n/a Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then
she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips
did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
Reason: A novel question; math reasoning necessary.
Analytic entailment The Great Gatsby is a book written by
F. Scott Fitzgerald. Therefore The
Great Gatsby comprises words.
Reason: Model can extract the fact
that the book has words from an
article describing the book.
Tom is George’s grandfather. So, George is a
descendant of Tom’s.
Reason: A novel, hypothetical scenario.
Codenames Try to identify the 4 words best
associated with the word DRIVE-IN
from the following list...Give your
answer in alphabetical order.
Reason: Model must determine word
co-occurrence likelihood based on
previously-encountered text.
n/a
Common morpheme What is the common morpheme among
these words: pyre, empyrean,
antipyretic...
Reason: Model must determine word
relations based on
previously-encountered text.
n/a
Fact checker On June 2017, the following claim was
made: The New Jersey Turnpike has
zero shoulders. Was this claim true or
false?
Reason: Model must recall
information from
previously-encountered text.
n/a
Figure of speech detection n/a They fought like cats and dogs.
Reason: Model must determine the proper figurative
language type of a novel sentence.
Hindu knowledge Which of the following Hindu deities
do not belong to the group of three
supreme divinities known as the
Trimurti?
Reason: Model must recall factual
information about Hinduism.
n/a
Logical deduction n/a On a shelf, there are three books: a black book, an
orange book, and a blue book. The blue book is to the
right of the orange book. The orange book is to the
right of the black book.
Reason: Model must keep track of spatially-oriented
objects in novel scenarios.
Task Example Memorisable Example Non-Memorisable
Continued on next page


===== PAGE 24 =====
Table 7: Selected examples from each of our chosen tasks to justify our classification of memorisable vs. non-memorisable
tasks. Note that some tasks contain both memorisable and non-memorisable examples, which occur in varying ratios
as shown in Table 2. Additionally, for our categorisation, we assume that leakage of task data is not a factor, i.e., an
example is memorisable if and only if it can be solved through memory recall of information. We assume that previous
memorisation of the actual question-answer pair has not occurred. (Continued)
Misconceptions Twinkies are edible for decades or
longer.
Reason: Model must recall factual
information about common topics.
n/a
Modified arithmetic n/a In the following lines, the symbol -> represents a
simple mathematical operation. 102 + 435 -> 537 ...
466 + 214 ->
Reason: A novel question; math reasoning necessary.
Phrase relatedness home town
“town center”, “location”, “native
city”...
Reason: Model must determine word
co-occurrence likelihood based on
previously-encountered text.
n/a
Physical intuition An object is moving in a vacuum at
velocity V with no net external forces
acting on it. Does the object have
nonzero acceleration?
Reason: Model must recall factual
information about physics.
n/a
Social IQA n/a Riley layered down their arms with a blanket. What
does Riley need to do before this?
Reason: Model must reason about novel social
situations.
Strange stories n/a Jane and Sarah are best friends. They both entered the
same painting competition. Now Jane wanted to win
this competition very much indeed, but when the
results were announced it was her best friend Sarah
who won, not her. Jane was very sad she had not won,
but she was happy for her friend, who got the prize.
Jane said to Sarah, “Well done, I’m so happy you won!”
Jane said to her mother, “I’m sad I didn’t win that
competition!” Why does Jane say she is happy and sad
at the same time?
Reason: Model must reason about novel social
situations.
Strategy QA Was Pollock trained by Leonardo da
Vinci?
Reason: Model can solve this by
recalling previously-encountered text
(such as a biography).
Could an escapee swim nonstop from Alcatraz island to
Siberia?
Reason: Model must combine known concepts to a
novel, hypothetical scenario.
Task Example Memorisable Example Non-Memorisable


===== PAGE 25 =====
G Complete results
In this section, we present our complete results. These encompass the performance plots for each of
our 22 tasks, arranged in the following order by model type: GPT, T5, and Other Models (Falcon and
LLaMA). For each model, the results are ordered as follows:
1. Exact match accuracy in the closed prompt setting
2. Exact match accuracy in the closed adversarial prompt setting
3. Exact match accuracy in the open prompt setting
4. BERTScore accuracy in the closed prompt setting
5. BERTScore accuracy in the open prompt setting
6. Edit distance in the closed prompt setting
7. Edit distance in the open prompt setting
Note that some metrics aren’t compatible with all tasks (e.g., BERTScore accuracy with GSM8K, see
Section 2.4), and that the codenames task is incompatible with the open prompt setting, since the task
requires choices to be provided in the input (see Section 2.4 and Table 7). For this reason, some figures
will contain fewer than 22 plots.
Model family Metric Prompt format Result
GPT
Exact match accuracy
closed Figure 6
closed adversarial Figure 7
open Figure 8
BERTScore accuracy closed Figure 9
open Figure 10
Edit distance closed Figure 11
open Figure 12
T5
Exact match accuracy
closed Figure 13
closed adversarial Figure 14
open Figure 15
BERTScore accuracy closed Figure 16
open Figure 17
Edit distance closed Figure 18
open Figure 19
Falcon
Exact match accuracy
closed Figure 20
closed adversarial Figure 21
open Figure 22
BERTScore accuracy closed Figure 23
open Figure 24
Edit distance closed Figure 25
open Figure 26
LLaMA
Exact match accuracy
closed Figure 27
closed adversarial Figure 28
open Figure 29
BERTScore accuracy closed Figure 30
open Figure 31
Edit distance closed Figure 32
open Figure 33
Table 8: Performance plots (Result) for models in each model family (Model family) using different metrics (Metric)
in the closed, closed adversarial, and open settings (Prompt format).


===== PAGE 26 =====
Figure 6: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models
using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 27 =====
Figure 7: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models
using the closed adversarial prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 28 =====
Figure 8: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models
using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 29 =====
Figure 9: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models
using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 30 =====
Figure 10: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models
using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 31 =====
Figure 11: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models using the
closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 32 =====
Figure 12: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) GPT models using the
open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 33 =====
Figure 13: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models
using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 34 =====
Figure 14: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models
using the closed adversarial prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 35 =====
Figure 15: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models
using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 36 =====
Figure 16: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models
using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 37 =====
Figure 17: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models
using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 38 =====
Figure 18: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models using the
closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 39 =====
Figure 19: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) T5 models using the
open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 20: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon
models using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 40 =====
Figure 21: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon
models using the closed adversarial prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 22: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon
models using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 23: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon
models using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 24: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon
models using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 25: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon models using
the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 41 =====
Figure 26: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) Falcon models using
the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 27: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA
models using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 28: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA
models using the closed adversarial prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 29: Exact match accuracy (EMA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA
models using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 30: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA
models using the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).


===== PAGE 42 =====
Figure 31: BERTScore accuracy (BSA) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA
models using the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 32: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA models using
the closed prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).
Figure 33: Edit distance (ED) for instruction-tuned (IT) and non-instruction-tuned (Non-IT) LLaMA models using
the open prompt in the settings of zero-shot (ZS) and few-shot (FS).