

===== PAGE 1 =====
Transformer Circuits Thread
AUTHORS
Catherine Olsson,Nelson Elhage,Neel Nanda,Nicholas Joseph,Nova DasSarma,Tom Henighan,Ben Mann,Amanda Askell,Yuntao Bai,Anna Chen,Tom Conerly,Dawn Drain,Deep Ganguli,Zac Hatfield-Dodds,Danny Hernandez,Scott Johnston,Andy Jones,Jackson Kernion,Liane Lovitt,Kamal Ndousse,Dario Amodei,Tom Brown,Jack Clark,Jared Kaplan,Sam McCandlish,Chris Olah
AFFILIATION
Anthropic
PUBLISHED
Mar 8, 2022
* Core Research Contributor;† Core Infrastructure Contributor;‡ Correspondence to colah@anthropic.com;Author contributions statement below.
In-context Learning andInduction Heads
∗ ∗ ∗ † †
† †
‡
Abstract: “Induction heads” are attention heads that implement a simple algorithm to complete
token sequences like [A][B] … [A] → [B]. In this work, we present preliminary and indirect evidencefor a hypothesis that induction heads might constitute the mechanism for the majority of all “in-
context learning” in large transformer models (i.e. decreasing loss at increasing token indices). Wefind that induction heads develop at precisely the same point as a sudden sharp increase in in-
context learning ability, visible as a bump in the training loss. We present six complementary lines of
evidence, arguing that induction heads may be the mechanistic source of general in-contextlearning in transformer models of any size. For small attention-only models, we present strong,
causal evidence; for larger models with MLPs, we present correlational evidence. 
We recommend reading this paper as an HTML article.
As Transformer generative models continue to scale and gain increasing real world use,addressing their associated safety problems becomes increasingly important. Mechanistic
interpretability – attempting to reverse engineer the detailed computations performed by the model– offers one possible avenue for addressing these safety issues. If we can understand the internal
structures that cause Transformer models to produce the outputs they do, then we may be able to
address current safety problems more systematically, as well as anticipating safety problems infuture more powerful models. 
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
1


===== PAGE 2 =====
In the past, mechanistic interpretability has largely focused on CNN vision models, but recently,
we presented some very preliminary progress on mechanistic interpretability for Transformerlanguage models  . Specifically, in our prior work we developed a mathematical framework for
decomposing the operations of transformers, which allowed us to make sense of small (1 and 2layer attention-only) models and give a near-complete account of how they function. Perhaps the
most interesting finding was the induction head, a circuit whose function is to look back over the
sequence for previous instances of the current token (call it A), find the token that came after it
last time (call it B), and then predict that the same completion will occur again (e.g. forming the
sequence [A][B] … [A] →  [B]). In other words, induction heads “complete the pattern” by
copying and completing sequences that have occurred before. Mechanically, induction heads in our
models are implemented by a circuit of two attention heads: the first head is a “previous token
head” which copies information from the previous token into the next token, while the second head(the actual “induction head”) uses that information to find tokens preceded by the present token.
For 2-layer attention-only models, we were able to show precisely that induction heads implementthis pattern copying behavior and appear to be the primary source of in-context learning.
[6]
[7]
2
Ultimately, however, our goal is to reverse-engineer frontier language models (which often contain
hundreds of layers and billions or trillions of parameters), not merely 2-layer attention-only models.Unfortunately, both the presence of many layers, and the presence of MLPs, makes it much more
difficult to mathematically pin down the precise circuitry of these models. However, a differentapproach is possible: by empirically observing, perturbing, and studying the learning process and
the formation of various structures, we can try to assemble an indirect case for what might be
happening mechanistically inside the network. This is somewhat similar to how a neuroscientistmight gain understanding of how part of the brain functions by looking at neural development over
time, studying patients with an injury to that part of the brain, perturbing brain function in animals,or looking at a select small number of relevant neurons.
In this paper, we take the first preliminary steps towards building such an indirect case. In particular,
we present preliminary and indirect evidence for a tantalizing hypothesis: that induction headsmight constitute the mechanism for the actual majority of all in-context learning in large transformer
models. Specifically, the thesis is that there are circuits which have the same or similar mechanismto the 2-layer induction heads and which perform a “fuzzy” or “nearest neighbor” version of pattern
completion, completing [A*][B*] … [A] →  [B] , where  A* ≈ A and B* ≈ Bare similar in
some space; and furthermore, that these circuits implement most in-context learning in largemodels.
The primary way in which we obtain this evidence is via discovery and study of a phase change that
occurs early in training for language models of every size (provided they have more than one layer),and which is visible as a bump in the training loss. During this phase change, the majority of in-
context learning ability (as measured by difference in loss between tokens early and late in thesequence) is acquired, and simultaneously induction heads form within the model that are capable
of implementing fairly abstract and fuzzy versions of pattern completion. We study this connection
in detail to try to establish that it is causal, including showing that if we perturb the transformerarchitecture in a way that causes the induction bump to occur in a different place in training, then
the formation of induction heads as well as formation of in-context learning simultaneously movealong with it.


===== PAGE 3 =====
Specifically, the paper presents six complementary lines of evidence arguing that induction heads
may be the mechanistic source of general in-context learning in transformer models of any size:
Argument 1(Macroscopic co-occurence): Transformer language models undergo a “phase
change” early in training, during which induction heads form and simultaneously in-contextlearning improves dramatically.
Argument 2(Macroscopic co-perturbation): When we change the transformer architecture
in a way that shifts whether induction heads can form (and when), the dramatic improvementin in-context learning shifts in a precisely matching way.
Argument 3(Direct ablation):  When we directly “knock out” induction heads at test-time insmall models, the amount of in-context learning greatly decreases.
Argument 4(Specific examples of induction head generality): Although we define induction
heads very narrowly in terms of copying literal sequences, we empirically observe that thesesame heads also appear to implement more sophisticated types of in-context learning,
including highly abstract behaviors, making it plausible they explain a large fraction of in-context learning.
Argument 5 (Mechanistic plausibility of induction head generality): For small models, we can
explain mechanistically how induction heads work, and can show they contribute to in-context learning. Furthermore, the actual mechanism of operation suggests natural ways in
which it could be re-purposed to perform more general in-context learning.
Argument 6(Continuity from small to large models): In the previous 5 arguments, the case
for induction heads explaining in-context learning is stronger for small models than for largeones. However, many behaviors and data related to both induction heads and in-context
learning are smoothly continuous from small to large models, suggesting the simplest
explanation is that mechanisms are the same.
Together the claims establish a circumstantial case that induction heads might be responsible for
the majority of in-context learning in state-of-the-art transformer models. We emphasize that ourresults here are only the beginnings of evidence for such a case, and that like any empirical or
interventional study, a large number of subtle confounds or alternative hypotheses are possible –which we discuss in the relevant sections. But we considered these results worth reporting, both
because future work could build on our results to establish the claim more firmly, and because this
kind of indirect evidence is likely to be common in interpretability as it advances, so weʼd like toestablish a norm of reporting it even when it is not fully conclusive.
Finally, in addition to being instrumental for tying induction heads to in-context learning, the phase
change may have relevance to safety in its own right. Neural network capabilities — such as multi-digit addition — are known to sometimes abruptly form or change as models train or increase in
scale , and are of particular concern for safety as they mean that undesired or dangerousbehavior could emerge abruptly. For example reward hacking, a type of safety problem, can emerge
in such a phase change. Thus, studying a phase change “up close” and better understanding its
internal mechanics could contain generalizable lessons for addressing safety problems in futuresystems. In particular, the phase change we observe forms an interesting potential bridge between
the microscopic domain of interpretability and the macroscopic domain of scaling laws and learningdynamics.
[8, 1]
[9]
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by clarifying several key concepts and
definitions, including in-context learning, induction heads, and a “per-token loss analysis” methodwe use throughout. We then present the 6 arguments one by one, drawing on evidence from
analysis of 34 transformers over the course of training, including more than 50,000 attention headablations (the data of which is shown in the Model Analysis Table). We then discuss some
unexplained “curiosities” in our findings, as well as reviewing related work.


===== PAGE 4 =====
Key Concepts
In-context Learning
In modern language models, tokens later in the context are easier to predict than tokens earlier inthe context. As the context gets longer, loss goes down. In some sense this is just what a sequence
model is designed to do (use earlier elements in the sequence to predict later ones), but as theability to predict later tokens from earlier ones gets better, it can increasingly be used in interesting
ways (such as specifying tasks, giving instructions, or asking the model to match a pattern) that
suggest it can usefully be thought of as a phenomenon of its own. When thought of in this way, it isusually referred to as in-context learning.3
Emergent in-context learning was noted in GPT-2 and gained significant attention in GPT-3.
Simply by adjusting a “prompt”, transformers can be adapted to do many useful things without re-training, such as translation, question-answering, arithmetic, and many other tasks. Using “prompt
engineering” to leverage in-context learning became a popular topic of study and discussion .
[10] [1]
[11, 12]
At least two importantly different ways of conceptualizing and measuring in-context learning exist in
the literature. The first conception, represented in Brown et al., focuses on few-shot learning ofspecific tasks. The model is prompted with several instances of some “task” framed in a next-
token-prediction format (such as few-digit addition, or English-to-French translation). The secondconception of in-context learning, represented in Kaplan et al. , focuses on observing the loss at
different token indices, in order to measure how much better the model gets at prediction as it
receives more context. The first conception can be thought of as a micro perspective (focusing onspecific tasks), where as the second conception can be seen as a macro perspective (focusing on
general loss, which on average correlates with these tasks).
[1]
[13]
The “few-shot learning” conception of in-context learning has tended to receive greater community
attention. The ability to do many different tasks with one large model, even without further fine-tuning, is a notable change to the basic economics of model training. Moreover, it gives evidence of
wide-ranging general capabilities and the ability to adapt on the fly, which nudges us to re-examinewhat it means for a model to “understand” or to “reason”.
However, for the purposes of this work, we focus instead on the Kaplan et al. conception:
decreasing loss at increasingtoken indices. We do so because it's a more general framing of thephenomenon than “few-shot learning”. A drawback of this definition is it fails to isolate specific
behaviors of interest. At the same time, it allows us to measure modelsʼ overall ability to learn on-the-fly from the context, without depending on our specific choices of “task”.  Weʼll also see that,
starting from this definition, we are also able to study a couple classic few-shot learning examples
(see Argument 4).
Throughout this work we compute a simple heuristic measure of in-context learning:
In-context learning score: the loss of the 500th token in the context minus the average lossof the 50th token in the context, averaged over dataset examples.
We chose the 500th and 50th token indices somewhat arbitrarily. The 500th token is near the end
of a length-512 context, and the 50th token is far enough into the context that some basicproperties of the text have been established (such as language and document type) while still being
near the start. We will also show that picking different numbers here does not change ourconclusions.


===== PAGE 5 =====
Finally, it is worth noting that in-context learning is of potentially special relevance to safety. In-
context learning makes it harder to anticipate how a model might behave after a long context. In thelonger run, concepts such as mesa-optimization or inner-alignment postulate that meaningful
learning or optimization could occur at test time (without changing the weights). In-context learningwould be an obvious future mechanism for such hidden optimization to occur, whether or not it
does so today. Thus, studying in-context learning seems valuable for the future.
(See Related Work for more on in-context learning, and Discussion for more on the connection tosafety.)
Induction Heads
In our previous paper, we discovered a special kind of attention head – which we named induction
heads – in two layer attention-only models. Induction heads are implemented by a circuit consisting
of a pair of attention heads in different layers that work together to copy or complete patterns. Thefirst attention head copies information from the previous token into each token. This makes it
possible for the second attention head to attend to tokens based on what happened before them,rather than their own content. Specifically, the second head (which we call the "induction head")
search for a previous place in the sequence where the present token A occurred and attends to
the next token (call it B), copying it and causing the model to be more likely to output B as the
next token. That is, the two heads working together cause the sequence …[A][B]…[A] to be more
likely to be completed with [B].
[14]
Induction heads are named by analogy to inductive reasoning. In inductive reasoning, we might infer
that if A is followed by B earlier in the context, A is more likely to be followed by B again later in
the same context. Induction heads crystallize that inference. They search the context for previous
instances of the present token, attend to the token which would come next if the pattern repeated,and increase its probability. Induction heads attend to tokens that would be predicted by basic
induction (over the context, rather than over the training data).
Notice that induction heads are implementing a simple algorithm, and are not memorizing a fixed
table of n-gram statistics. The rule [A][B] … [A] →  [B] applies regardless of what A and B
are.This means that induction heads can in some sense work out of distribution, as long as local
statistics early in the context are representative of statistics later. This hints that they may becapable of more general and abstract behavior.
4
Our previous paper focused on a few explorations of induction heads, including showing that these
heads occur in 2-layer attention-only models (but not 1-layer models); tracking down how theyoperate mechanistically as part of our mathematical decomposition of transformers; and making an
eigenvalue-based test for detecting their presence. However, we were a bit vague on the exactdefinition of induction heads: it was more like we found a cluster of behaviors and mechanisms that
tended to occur together, and called heads in that cluster “induction heads”.
In this paper our goal is to provide evidence for something more expansive: that induction headsplay a major role in general in-context learning (not just literal [A][B]...[A] → [B] copying), for
large models and not just for small 2-layer attention only models.  To do this clearly and coherently,we need a more precise definition of induction heads. Mechanistic analysis of weights and
eigenvalue analysis are much more complicated in large models with MLPʼs, so for this paper we
choose to define induction heads by their narrow empirical sequence copying behavior (the[A][B]...[A] → [B]), and then attempt to show that they (1) also serve a more expansive
function that can be tied to in-context learning, and (2) coincide with the mechanistic picture forsmall models.


===== PAGE 6 =====
Formally, we define an induction head as one which exhibits the following two propertieson a
repeated random sequenceof tokens:
Prefix matching: The head attends back to previous tokens that were followed by the
current and/or recent tokens.That is, it attends to the token which induction would suggestcomes next.
Copying: The headʼs output increases the logit corresponding to the attended-to token.
5
6
7
In other words, induction heads are any heads that empirically increase the likelihood of [B] given
[A][B]...[A] when shown a repeated sequence of completely random tokens. An illustration of
induction headsʼ behavior is shown here:
Note that, as a consequence, induction heads will tend to be good at repeating sequenceswholesale. For example, given “The cat sat on the mat. The cat …”, induction heads will promote the
continuation “sat on the mat”. This gives a first hint of how they might be connected to general in-context learning and even few-shot learning: they learn to repeat arbitrary sequences, which is a
(simple) form of few-shot learning.
One of things weʼll be trying to establish is that when induction heads occur in sufficiently large
models and operate on sufficiently abstract representations, the very same heads that do thissequence copying also take on a more expanded role of analogical sequence copying or in-context
nearest neighbors. By this we mean that they promote sequence completions like[A*][B*] … [A] →  [B] where A* is not exactly the same token as A but similar in some
embedding space, and also B is not exactly the same token as B*. For example, A and A* (as
well as B and B*) might be the same word in different languages, and the induction head can then
translate a sentence word by word by looking for “something like A”, finding A* followed byB*,
and then completing with “something like B*” (which is B). We are not yet able to prove
mechanistically that induction heads do this in general, but in Argument 4 we show empirical
examples of induction heads behaving in this way (including on translation), and in Argument 5 we
point out that the known copying mechanism of induction heads in small models can be naturallyadapted to function in this way.
Per-Token Loss Analysis
To better understand how models evolve during training, we analyze what we call the "per-tokenloss vectors." The core idea traces back to a method used by Erhan et al. , and more generally to
the idea of "function spaces" in mathematics.
[15]
8


===== PAGE 7 =====
We start with a collection of models. (In our use, we'll train several different model architectures,
saving dozens of “snapshots” of each over the course of training. Weʼll use this set of snapshots asour collection of models.) Next, we collect the log-likelihoods each model assigns to a consistent
set of 10,000 random tokens, each taken from a different example sequence. We combine theselog-likelihoods into a "per-token loss vector" and apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA):
A more detailed discussion of technical details can be found in the Appendix.
By applying this method to snapshots over training for multiple models, we can visualize andcompare how different models' training trajectories evolve in terms of their outputs. Since we're
using PCA, each direction can be thought of as a vector of log-likelihoods that models are movingalong. We particularly focus on the first two principal components, since we can easily visualize
those. Of course, models also move in directions not captured by the first two principal
components, but it's a useful visualization for capturing the highest-level story of training.
Arguments that induction heads are themechanism for the majority of in-contextlearning.
Now weʼll proceed to the main part of the paper, which makes the case that induction heads mayprovide the primary mechanism for the majority of in-context learning for transformer models in
general. As stated in the introduction, this is a very broad hypothesis and much of our evidence isindirect, but nevertheless we believe that all the lines of evidence together make a relatively strong,
though not conclusive, case.
Before we go through the arguments, itʼs useful to delineate where the evidence is more conclusive
vs. less conclusive. This is shown in the table below. For small, attention-only models, we believe wehave strong evidence that attention heads are the mechanism for the majority of in-context
learning, as we have evidence supported by ablations and mechanistic reverse engineering.Conversely, for all models, we can make a strong case that induction heads play some role in in-
context learning, as we can demonstrate examples and show suggestive correlations. However, the
larger the models get, the harder it is to establish that induction heads account for the actualmajority of in-context learning. For large models with MLPʼs, we must therefore rely on mainly
correlational evidence, which could be confounded. We explore alternate hypotheses throughout,including at the end of Argument 1 and again briefly in   Argument 6.


===== PAGE 8 =====
SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE FOR SUB-CLAIMS (STRONGEST ARGUMENT FOR EACH)
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Strong, Causal Strong, Causal Medium, Correlational &Mechanistic
Contributes MajorityStrong, Causal Medium, Causal Medium, Correlational
Here is the list of arguments weʼll be making, one per section, repeated from the introduction:
Argument 1(Macroscopic co-occurrence): Transformer language models undergo a “phasechange” early in training, during which induction heads form and simultaneously in-context
learning improves dramatically.
Argument 2(Macroscopic co-perturbation): When we change the transformer architecture
in a way that shifts whether induction heads can form (and when), the dramatic improvement
in in-context learning shifts in a precisely matching way.
Argument 3(Direct ablation):  When we directly “knock out” induction heads at test-time in
small models, the amount of in-context learning greatly decreases.
Argument 4(Specific examples of induction head generality): Although we define induction
heads very narrowly in terms of copying literal sequences, we empirically observe that these
same heads also appear to implement more sophisticated types of in-context learning,including highly abstract behaviors, making it plausible they explain a large fraction of in-
context learning.
Argument 5(Mechanistic plausibility of induction head generality): For small models, we can
explain mechanistically how induction heads work, and can show they contribute to in-
context learning.  Furthermore, the actual mechanism of operation suggests natural ways inwhich it could be repurposed to perform more general in-context learning.
Argument 6(Continuity from small to large models): In the previous 5 arguments, the casefor induction heads explaining in-context learning is stronger for small models than for large
ones.  However, many behaviors and data related to both induction heads and in-contextlearning are smoothly continuous from small to large models, suggesting the simplest
explanation is that mechanisms are the same.
For each argument, weʼll have a similar table to the one in this section, showing the strength of the
evidence provided by that claim as it applies to large/small models and some/most of contextlearning. The table above is the sum of the evidence from all six lines of reasoning.
Argument 1: Transformer language modelsundergo a “phase change” during training,during which induction heads form andsimultaneously in-context learning improvesdramatically.
Our first line of evidence comes from correlating measures of in-context learning and measures ofinduction head presence over the course of training. Specifically, we observe a tight co-variation
between them across dozens of models, of different sizes, trained on different datasets (See ModelAnalysis Table for more on the models in which we observe this co-occurrence.).


===== PAGE 9 =====
The table below summarizes the quality of this evidence for the models we have studied: it applies
to both large and small models, and is the expected outcome if induction heads were responsiblefor the majority of in-context learning, but it is only correlational and so could be confounded
(discussed more below).
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Medium, Correlational Medium, Correlational Medium, Correlational
Contributes MajorityMedium, Correlational Medium, Correlational Medium, Correlational
Our first observation is that if we measure in-context learning for transformer models over the
course of training (defined as the 50th token loss minus the 500th token loss as described in KeyConcepts), it develops abruptly in a narrow window early in training (roughly 2.5 to 5 billion tokens)
and then is constant for the rest of training (see figure below).  Before this window there is less than0.15 nats of in-context learning, after it there is roughly 0.4 nats, an amount that remains constant
for the rest of training and is also constant across many different model sizes (except for the one
layer model where not much in-context learning ever forms).  This seems surprising – naively, onemight expect in-context learning to improve gradually over training, and improve with larger model
sizes,as most things in machine learning do.9
Although we only show three models above, the pattern holds true very generally: many examples
are shown in the Model Analysis Table later in the paper, including models of varying modelarchitecture and size.


===== PAGE 10 =====
One might wonder if the sudden increase is somehow an artifact of the choice to define in-context
learning in terms of the difference between the 500th and 50th tokens. We'll discuss this in moredepth later. But for now, an easy way to see that this is a robust phenomena is to look at the
derivative of loss with respect to the logarithm token index in context. You can think of this asmeasuring something like "in-context learning per ε% increase in context length." We can visualize
this on a 2D plot, where one axis is the amount of training that has elapsed, the other is the token
index being predicted. Before the phase change, loss largely stops improving around token 50, butafter the phase change, loss continues to improve past that point.
It turns out that a sudden improvement in in-context learning isn't the only thing that changes in this
window. If we go through the attention heads of a model and and score them for whether they areinduction heads (using a prefix matching score which measures their ability to perform the task we
used to define induction heads in Key Concepts), we find that induction heads form abruptly duringexactly the same window where in-context learning develops (figure below). Again we show only a
few models here, but a full set is shown in the Model Analysis Table. The exception is the one-layer
model, where induction heads never form – just as in-context learning never substantially developsfor the one-layer model.


===== PAGE 11 =====
This already strongly suggests some connection between induction heads and in-context learning,
but beyond just that, it appears this window is a pivotal point for the training process in general:whatever's occurring is visible as a bump on the training curve (figure below). It is in fact the only
place in training where the loss is not convex (monotonically decreasing in slope).
That might not sound significant, but the loss curve is averaging over many thousands of tokens.
Many behaviors people find interesting in language models, such as the emergence of arithmetic,would be microscopic on the loss curve. For something to be visible at that scale suggests it's a
widespread, major change in model behavior. This shift also appears to be the first point where, atleast for small models, the loss curve diverges from a one-layer model – which does not display the
bump, just as it does not display the other abrupt changes.


===== PAGE 12 =====
We can also apply principal components analysis (PCA) to the per-token losses, as described inper-token-loss analysis, which allows us to summarize the main dimensions of variation in how
several models' predictions vary over the course of training.
Below we show the first two principal components of these modelsʼ predictions, with the golden
outline highlighting the same interval shown above, when in-context learning abruptly improved. Wesee that the training trajectories pivot during exactly the same window where the other changes
happen. In some sense, whatever is occurring when in-context learning improves is the primarydeviation from the basic trajectory our transformers follow during the course of their training.  Once
again the only exception is the one-layer model – where induction heads cannot form and in-
context learning does not improve.



===== PAGE 13 =====
In summary, the following things all co-occur during the same abrupt window:
Capacity for in-context learning sharply improves (as measured via the in-context learningscore).
Induction heads form.
Loss undergoes a small “bump” (that is, the loss curve undergoes a period of visibly steeper
improvement than the parts of the curve before and after).
The modelʼs trajectory abruptly changes (in the space of per-token losses, as visualized withPCA).
Collectively these results suggest that some important transition is happening during the 2.5e9 to
5e9 token window early in training (for large models this is maybe 1-2% of the way throughtraining). We call this transition “the phase change”, in that itʼs an abrupt change that alters the
modelʼs behavior and has both macroscopic (loss and in-context learning curves) and microscopic(induction heads) manifestations, perhaps analogous to e.g. ice melting. 10
Looking at the Phase Change More Closely
A natural explanation would be that for all these models, the induction heads implement in-contextlearning: their formation is what drives all the other changes observed. To strengthen this
hypothesis a bit, we check a few things. First, the window where the phase change happens doesnʼtappear to correspond to a scheduled change in learning rate, warmup, or weight decay; there is not
some known exogenous factor precipitating everything. Second, we tried out training some of the
small models on a different dataset, and we observed the phase change develop in the same way(see Model Analysis Table for more details). 11
Third, to strengthen the connection a little more, we look qualitatively and anecdotally at whatʼs
going on with the modelʼs behavior during the phase change. One way to do this is to look atspecific tokens the model gets better and worse at predicting. The model's loss is an average of
billions of log-likelihood losses for individual tokens. By pulling them apart, we can get a sense forwhat's changed.
Concretely, let's pick a piece of text – for fun, we'll use the first paragraph of Harry Potter – and look
at the differences in log-likelihoods comparing the start and the end of the phase change.We'llnotice that the majority of the changes occur when tokens are repeated multiple times in the text. If
a sequence of tokens occurs multiple times, the model is better at predicting the sequence thesecond time it shows up. On the other hand, if a token is followed by a different token than it
previously was, the post-phase-change model is worse at predicting it:
12


===== PAGE 14 =====
We can also do this same analysis over the course of model training. The loss curve is the average
of millions of per-token loss curves. We can break this apart and look at the loss curves forindividual tokens.
In particular, letʼs take a look at per-token loss trajectories for two tokens in the first paragraph of
Harry Potter. In red, we show a token whose prediction gets dramatically better during the phasechange: itʼs the last of four tokens in “ The Dursleys”, a sequence that appears several times in the
text. In blue, we show a token that gets meaningfully worse during the phase change: itʼs the first-ever appearance of “ Mrs Potter”, after both previous instances of “ Mrs” were followed by “
Dursley” instead.
All of this shows that during the phase change, we see exactly the behaviors weʼd expect to see if
induction heads were indeed contributing the majority of in-context learning.


===== PAGE 15 =====
Assessing the Evidence
Despite all of the co-occurrence evidence above (and more in the Model Analysis Table), the factremains that we havenʼt shown that induction heads are the primary mechanism for in-context
learning. We have merely shown that induction heads form at the same time as in-context learning,and that in-context learning does not improve thereafter. There are a number of potential confounds
in this story. Below we summarize reasons in favor and against thinking the connection is causal.
The argument in favor might look like this:
The formation of induction heads is correlated with a great increase in models' capacity for
in-context learning, for a wide variety of models large and small.
It's highly improbable these two sharp transitions would co-occur across so many models by
pure chance, without any causal connection.
There is almost surely some connection, and the simplest possibility is that induction heads
are the primary mechanism driving the observed increase in in-context learning. (However, as
discussed below, it could also be a confounding variable.)
Since over 75% of final in-context learning forms in this window, one might naively believe
this to be the amount of in-context learning that induction heads are responsible for.
However, the following issues and confounds suggest caution:
In large models, we have low time resolution on our analysis over training. Co-occurrencewhen one only has 15 points in time is less surprising and weaker evidence.
Perhaps other mechanisms form in our models at this point, that contribute to not onlyinduction heads, but also other sources of in-context learning. (For example, perhaps the
phase change is really the point at which the model learns how to compose layers through
the residual stream, enabling both induction heads and potentially many other mechanismsthat also require composition of multiple heads) Put another way, perhaps the co-occurrence
is primarily caused by a shared latent variable, rather than direct causality from inductionheads to the full observed change in in-context learning.
The fact that in-context learning score is roughly constant (at 0.4 nats) after the phase
change doesn't necessarily mean that the underlying mechanisms of in-context learning areconstant after that point. In particular, the metric we use measures a relative loss between
the token index 500 and 50, and we know that the modelʼs performance at token 50improves over training time. Reducing the loss a fixed amount from a lower baseline is likely
harder, and so may be driven by additional mechanisms as training time goes on. 
One point worth noting here is that the argument that induction heads account for most in-contextlearning at the transition point of the phase change is more solid than the argument that they
account for most in-context learning at the end of training – a lot could be changing during trainingeven as the in-context learning score remains constant.
1314


===== PAGE 16 =====
Argument 2: When we change thetransformer architecture in a way that shiftswhen induction heads form or whether theycan form, the dramatic improvement in in-context learning shifts in a preciselymatching way.
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Medium, Interventional Medium, Interventional Weak, Interventional
Contributes MajorityMedium, Interventional Medium, Interventional Weak, Interventional
One thing that falls short about Argument 1 is that weʼre just observing induction heads and in-
context learning co-vary; like any observational study, it is not as convincing as if we activelychanged one thing and measured what happened to the other. In this section we do a more
“interventional” experiment, in which we change the model architecture in a way that makesinduction heads easier to form, and observe the effect on in-context learning. The change makes a
bigger difference for smaller models so is more convincing there, but also carries some amount of
weight for larger models (see table above).
To design our experiment, we start with the observation (noted in the previous section) that the
phase change and the corresponding improvement in in-context learning only occurs intransformers with more than one layer. This is what we'd predict if induction heads were the
mechanism for the majority of in-context learning: induction heads require a composition ofattention heads, which is only possible with two or more layers.15
Of course, the observation about one-layer models is pretty weak evidence by itself. (One could
imagine one-layer models being different from models with more layers in all sorts of ways!) But itsuggests a more general line of attack. If induction heads are the mechanism behind the large
improvement in in-context learning, that makes predictions about the minimum architecturalrequirements in order to achieve the observed improvement. For a standard transformer, the
important thing is to have two attention layers. But that's only because the key vectors need to be a
function of the attended token and the token before it.
We define a “smeared key" architecture with a very simple modification that should make it easy for
transformers of any depth to express induction heads. In our modified models, for each head , weintroduce a trainable real parameter  which we use as  to interpolate between the
key for the current token and previous token:
The hypothesis that induction heads are the primary mechanism of in-context learning predicts that
the phase change will happen in one-layer models with this change, and perhaps might happenearlier in models with more layers. If they're one of several major contributing factors, we might
expect some of the in-context learning improvement to happen early, and the rest at the same timeas the original phase change.
hαh σ(α)∈[0,1]h
16
k  = σ(α)k  + (1−σ(α))k  
jh h jh h j−1h


===== PAGE 17 =====
The results (figure below) are in line with the predictions: when we use the smeared-key
architecture, in-context learning does indeed form for one-layer models (when it didnʼt before), andit forms earlier for two-layer and larger models.  More such results can be seen in the model
analysis table.
These plots are an excerpt of the Model Analysis Table; look there to see more analysis of how the smear models compare totheir vanilla counterparts.
However, we probably shouldn't make too strong an inference about large models on this evidence.
This experiment suggests that induction heads are the minimal mechanism for greatly increased in-context learning in transformers. But one could easily imagine that in larger models, this mechanism
isnʼt the whole story, and also this experiment doesnʼt refute the idea of the mechanism of in-context learning changing over the course of training.


===== PAGE 18 =====
Argument 3: When we directly “knock out”induction heads in small models at test-time,the amount of in-context learning greatlydecreases.
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Strong, Causal Strong, Causal
Contributes MajorityStrong, Causal Medium, Causal
For the cases they cover, ablations are by far our strongest evidence. The basic argument is that
knocking out induction heads decreases the amount of in-context learning we observe in ourmodels. By “knocking out” we mean that we remove a given attention head from the model at test
time, doing a forward pass on the transformer without it. (See our methods section for exact detailsof how the ablation is done.)
The ablations presented below show how attention heads contribute to in-context learning, but we
can also do ablations to study how attention heads contribute to the overall behavior change thatoccurs during the phase change (see the Model Analysis Table).
These plots are a small excerpt of the Model Analysis Table; look there to see the full evidence. See our methods section forexact details of how the ablation is done.



===== PAGE 19 =====
In fact, almost all the in-context learning in small attention-only models appears to come from these
induction heads! This begins at the start of the phase change, and remains true through the end oftraining.17
Unfortunately, we do not have ablations for our full-scale models.For the models where we do
have ablations, it seems like this evidence is clearly dispositive that induction heads increase in-context learning (at least as we've chosen to evaluate it). But can we further infer that they're the
primary mechanism? A couple considerations:
18
In attention-only models, in-context learning must essentially be a sum of contributions from
different attention heads.But in models with MLPs, in-context learning could also comefrom interactions between MLP and attention layers. While ablating attention heads would
affect such mechanisms, the relationship between the effect of the ablation on in-contextlearning and its true importance becomes more complicated.As a result, we can't be fully
confident that head ablations in MLP models give us the full picture.
Our ablations measure the marginal effects of removing attention heads from the model. Tothe extent two heads do something similar and the layer norm before the logits rescales
things, the importance of individual heads may be masked.
19
20
All things considered, we feel comfortable concluding from this that induction heads are the primary
mechanism for in-context learning in small attention-only models, but see this evidence as onlysuggestive for the MLP case.
Argument 4: Despite being definednarrowly as copying random sequences,induction heads can implement surprisinglyabstract types of in-context learning.
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Plausibility
Contributes Majority Plausibility
All of our previous evidence (in Arguments 1-3) focused on observing or perturbing the connection
between induction head formation and macroscopic in-context learning. A totally different angle isto just find examples of induction heads implementing seemingly-difficult in-context learning
behaviors; this would make it plausible that induction heads account for the majority of in-contextlearning. This evidence applies even to the very largest models (and we study up to 12B parameter
models), but since it shows only a small number of tasks, itʼs only suggestive regarding in-context
learning in general.
Recall that we define induction heads as heads that empirically copy arbitrary token sequences
using a “prefix matching” attention pattern. Our goal is to find heads that meet this definition butalso perform more interesting and sophisticated behaviors, essentially showing that induction heads
in large models can be “generalizable”.


===== PAGE 20 =====
In this argument, we show some anecdotal examples of induction heads from larger transformers
(our 40-layer model with 13 billion parameters) that exhibit exactly such behaviors – namely literalcopying, translation, and a specific type of abstract pattern matching. The behaviors are all of the
form [A*][B*]...[A][B], aka the “fuzzy nearest neighbor match” or “find something similar
early in the sequence and complete the sequence in analogy”. We verify that these heads score
highly on our “copying” and “prefix matching” evaluations (that is, they increase the probability of
the token they attend to, and attend to tokens where the prefix matches the present token onrandom text), and are thus “induction heads” by our strict empirical definition, at the same time as
they also perform these more sophisticated tasks.
The results of some example heads are shown in the table below, and described in the subsections
below.
Head Layer Depth Copying score Prefix matching score 
Literal copying head 21 / 40 0.89 0.75
Translation head 7 / 40 0.20 0.85
Pattern-matching head 8 / 40 0.69 0.94
(? )
(? )
Behavior 1: Literal sequence copying
We'll start with the simplest case of a head that literally copies repeated text, to get familiar with thevisualization interface we're using and the basic dynamics of these heads. We've selected an
induction head which seems to perform very basic copying behavior and will look at how it behaveson the first paragraph of Harry Potter. We've repeated the first few sentences afterwards to show
the head's behavior on longer segments of repeated text. For the following interactive
visualizations, we recommend visiting the HTML article.
The visualization will show two different things:
In red, "Attention" lets you see where the head is attending to predict the next token.
In blue, "Logit attr" shows the earlier tokens that contributed to the prediction of the
current token, using "direct-path" logit attribution.21


===== PAGE 21 =====
To start exploring the visualization, we suggest you visit theHTML article and try hovering your
cursor over the second paragraph.
If you explore the visualization, you'll see that the head predicts repeating the names "Dursley" and
"Potters"; the phrase "a small son”; and then the entire repeated sentences at the end. In all cases,these successful predictions are made by attending back to a previous instance where this phrase
was present in the text.
Behavior 2: Translation
It's a well-known result that language models can translate between languages. Intriguingly, we'veencountered many examples of induction heads that can do translation. Here, we explore a head we
found in layer 7 of our 40-layer model, showcasing translation between English, French, andGerman. (As with the others in this section, this head is also an “induction head” by the same
definition weʼve been using all along, because when shown repeated random tokens, it uses a
“prefix matching” attention pattern to copy the sequence verbatim.)


===== PAGE 22 =====
Note that the overall attention pattern (in red, top left) is more or less an “off-diagonal”, but it
meanders a little bit away from a sharp diagonal. The meandering is because different languageshave different word order and token lengths. As this head attends sequentially to past tokens that
will semantically come next, the attended token position in the earlier sentences jumps around.
The logit attribution patterns for this head are not perfectly sharp; that is, even in cases where the
attention head is attending to the matching word in an earlier language, it does not alwaysdirectly increase the logit of the corresponding prediction. We would guess that this is because this
headʼs output needs to be further processed by later layers. However, taken overall, the direct logitattributions show clear evidence of contributing on net to the correct translation.
Behavior 3: Pattern matching
In this final example, we show an attention head (found at layer 26 of our 40-layer model) whichdoes more complex pattern matching. One might even think of it as learning a simple function in
context! (Again, this head also scores highly on our  of “basic” induction behaviorwhen shown repeated random sequences, so it is an induction head by that definition.)
m e a sure m e nts
To explore this behavior, we've generated some synthetic text which follows a simple pattern. Each
line follows one of four templates, followed by a label for which template it is drawn from. Thetemplate is random selected, as are the words which fill in the template:
(month) (animal): 0
(month) (fruit): 1
(color) (animal): 2
(color) (fruit): 3
Below, we show how the attention head behaves on this synthetic example. To make the diagram
easier to read, we've masked the attention pattern to only show the ":" tokens are the destination,and the logit attribution to only show where the output is the integer tokens.


===== PAGE 23 =====
This head attends back to a previous instance of the correct category more often than not. It often
knows to skip over lines where one of the words is identical but the pattern is wrong (such as“January bird” primarily attending to “April fish” and not “grey bird”). This head isnʼt perfect at this,
but empirically it allocates about 65% of its attention from the colons to the correct positions, whentested on a range of similar problems.


===== PAGE 24 =====
Whatʼs going on with more abstract heads that are also inductionheads?
We emphasize again that the attention heads that we described above simultaneously implement
both the abstract behaviors that we described, and these very same attention heads (as in, theexact same head in the same layer) also satisfy the formal definition of induction head (literal
copying of random sequences using prefix matching).  The comparison is not a metaphor or a
blurring of the definition: induction heads which are defined by their ability to copy literal sequencesturn out to also sometimes match more abstract patterns.  This is what the table at the beginning of
the section shows empirically.
But this still leaves the question: why do the same heads that inductively copy random text also
exhibit these other behaviors?  One hint is that these behaviors can be seen as “spiritually similar”to copying.  Recall that where an induction head is defined as implementing a rule like
[A][B] … [A] →  [B], our empirically observed heads also do something like
[A*][B*] … [A] →  [B] where A* and B* are similar to A and B in some higher-level
representation.  There are several ways these similar behaviors could be connected.  For example,
note that the first behavior is a special case of the second, so perhaps induction heads areimplementing a more general algorithm that reverts to the special case of copying when given a
repeated sequence .  Another possibility is that induction heads implement literal copying whenthey take a path through the residual stream that includes only them, but implement more abstract
behaviors when they process the outputs of earlier layers that create more abstract representations
(such as representations where the same word in English and French are embedded in the sameplace).
22
In Argument 5 weʼll strengthen this argument by giving a mechanistic account of how induction
heads (when doing simple copying with prefix-matching) attend back to the token that comes nextin the pattern, and observe that the actual mechanism they use could naturally generalize to more
abstract pattern matching.  Our point in this section is just that it's actually quite natural for thesemore abstract induction heads to also exhibit the basic copying behaviors underlying our definition.


===== PAGE 25 =====
Argument 5: For small models, we canexplain mechanistically how induction headswork, and can show they contribute to in-context learning. Furthermore, the actualmechanism of operation suggests naturalways in which it could be re-purposed toperform more general in-context learning.
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Strong, Mechanistic Strong, Mechanistic Medium, Mechanistic
Contributes MajorityWeak, Mechanistic
One of the main reasons we care about whether induction heads drive in-context learning is that we
can understand them and so have a path to understanding in-context learning. But we can also turnthis around: we can use our understanding of induction heads to make a purely logical argument
that they should contribute to in-context learning.
We begin with a semi-empirical argument. Let's take for granted that induction heads behave the
way we've described and empirically seen, searching the context for previous examples andcopying what happened next. We should expect such a procedure to improve a model's ability to
predict tokens later in its context. We're essentially using the previous context as data points for anearest neighbor algorithm, and nearest neighbors improves as one gives it more data points.
Therefore, if induction heads exist as described, they would contribute to in-context learning as
we've defined it.
In some sense, this argument is quite strong if we're only arguing that there exist some cases where
induction heads contribute to in-context learning. We've seen concrete examples above whereinduction heads improve token predictions by copying earlier examples. If nothing else, they must
help in those cases! And more generally, our definition of induction heads (in terms of their behavioron repeated random sequences) suggests they behave this way quite generally. This argument
doesn't say anything about what fraction of in-context learning is performed by induction heads,
but it seems like a very strong argument that some is, both in large and small models.


===== PAGE 26 =====
But the really satisfying thing about this line of attack — namely, using our understanding of
induction heads to anticipate their impact on in-context learning — is that we can actually drop thedependency on empirical observations of induction head behavior, at the cost of needing to make a
more complex argument. In our previous paper, we were able to reverse engineer induction heads,showing from the parameter level how they implement induction behavior (and that they should). If
we trust this analysis, we can know how induction heads behave without actually running them, and
the argument we made in the previous paragraph goes through. Of course, there are somelimitations. In the previous paper, we only reverse engineered a single induction head in a small
attention-only model, although we can reverse engineered others (and have done so). A biggerissue is that right now we're unable to reverse engineer induction heads in models with MLP layers.
But at least in some cases weʼve observed, we can look at the parameters of a transformer and
identify induction heads, just as a programmer might identify an algorithm by reading throughsource code.
We can actually push this argument a bit further in the case of the two-layer attention only
transformer we reverse engineered in the previous paper. Not only do we understand the inductionheads and know that they should contribute to in-context learning, but there doesn't seem to really
be an alternative mechanism that could be driving it.This suggests that induction heads are theprimary driver of in-context learning, at least in very small models.
23
The following section will briefly summarize reverse engineering induction heads. Note that it relies
heavily on linking to our previous paper. We do not expect it to be possible to follow without readingthe linked portions. After that, we briefly discuss how the described mechanism could also
implement more abstract types of induction head behavior.
Summary of Reverse Engineering Induction Heads
Note: This section provides a dense summary with pointers to our previous paper; please see theprevious paper for more information.
Recall from Key Concepts that induction heads are defined as heads that exhibit both copyingand
prefix matching.
Copying is done by the OV ("Output-Value") circuit. One of the defining properties of an
induction head is that it copies. Induction heads are not alone in this! Transformers seem to havequite a number of copying heads, of which induction heads are a subset. This is done by having a
"copying matrix" OV circuit, most easily characterized by its positive eigenvalues.
Prefix matching is implemented with K-composition (and to a lesser extent Q-composition) in
the QK ("Query-Key") Circuit. In order to do prefix matching, the key vector at the attended tokenneeds to contain information about the preceding tokens — in fact, information about the attended
token itself is quite irrelevant to calculating the attention pattern for induction.In the models westudy, “key shifting” occurs primarily using what we call K-composition. That is to say that an
induction headʼs  reads from a subspace written to by an earlier attention head. The most basic
form of an induction head uses pure K-composition with an earlier “previous token head” to create aQK-Circuit term of the form  where  has positive eigenvalues. This term causes
the induction head to compare the current token with every earlier position's preceding token andlook for places where they're similar. More complex QK circuit terms can be used to create
induction heads which match on more than just the preceding token.
24
W 
K
Id⊗h  ⊗Wprev W


===== PAGE 27 =====
Induction heads use previous heads to shift key information and match it against the present token. As they get moresophisticated, they also shift query information.
Combined, these are a detectable mechanism for induction heads. In the small models we
studied in our previous paper, all induction heads have the described QK term driving their attentionpattern and a positive eigenvalue circuit performing copying.
Some models use a different mechanism to implement induction heads. In GPT-2, we've
seen evidence of a second "pointer-arithmetic" mechanism for induction heads. This mechanismmakes use of the positional embedding and “Q-composition”. In GPT-2, the earlier attention head
attends to previous copies of the current token, and its  circuit copies their positionalembedding into a subspace in the present token. The induction head then uses Q-composition to
rotate that position embedding one token forward, and thereby attend to the following token. This
mechanism isn't available to the models we study here, since they do not add positional informationinto the residual stream.
[10]
W VO
25
What About More Complex Induction Heads?
What about the induction heads we saw in Argument 2 with more complex behavior? Can we alsoreverse engineer them? Do they operate on the same mechanisms? Presently, fully reverse
engineering them is beyond us, since they exist in large models with MLPs, which we don't have astrong framework for mechanistically understanding.  However, we hypothesize they're different in
two ways: (1) using more complex QK terms rather than matching on just the previous token; and (2)
matching and copying more abstract and sophisticated linguistic features, rather than precisetokens.
When we first introduced induction heads, we observed that they could be seen as a kind of "in-
context nearest neighbor" algorithm. From this perspective, it seems natural that applying the samemechanism to more abstract features can produce more complex behavior.


===== PAGE 28 =====
Argument 6: Extrapolation from smallmodels suggests induction heads areresponsible for the majority of in-contextlearning in large models.
STRENGTH OF ARGUMENT FOR SUB-CLAIMS
Small Attention-Only Small with MLPs Large Models
Contributes Some Analogy
Contributes Majority Analogy
This argument is really an extended inference from all the above arguments. Arguments 1-5 present
fairly strong evidence that in small transformers (especially small attention-only models), inductionheads are responsible for the majority of in-context learning, while for large transformers, the
evidence is not as strong. To what extent can one reasonably infer from small models that the samething is happening in larger models? Obviously this is a matter of judgment.
The measurements in the model analysis table look fully analogous between the small attention-
only, small models with MLPs, and full-scale model cases. Provided there's more than one layer, allof them go through a phase change. All of them have the same sharp increase in in-context
learning, with the same rough amounts before and after the transition. All of them trace similarpaths in PCA space. All of them form induction heads.
If things change from the small model case to the large model case, where do they change? And
why is there no visible sign of the change in all our measurements?
On the flip side, there are many cases where large models behave very differently than small models
(see discussion of phase changes with respect to model size in Related Work). Extrapolating fromsmall models to models many orders of magnitude larger is something one should do with caution.
The most compelling alternative possibility we see is that other composition mechanisms may also
form during the phase change. Larger models have more heads, which gives them more capacityfor other interesting Q-composition and K-composition mechanisms that small models canʼt afford
to express. If all “composition heads” form simultaneously during the phase change, then itʼspossible that above some size, non-induction composition heads could together account for more
of the phase change and in-context learning improvement than induction heads do.
Model Analysis Table
The arguments above are based on analysis of 34 decoder-only Transformer language models, with
different snapshots saved over the course of training, for one run of training per model. The modelsare drawn from four different model series as follows:


===== PAGE 29 =====
“Small, attention-only models”, a series of models (from 1-layer to 6-layer) that do not have
MLPs, and were trained specifically for the present investigations.
“Small models with MLPs”, a series of models (from 1-layer to 6-layer) that have both
attention and MLP layers, and were trained specifically for the present investigations.
“Full-scale models”, a series of successively-larger models with MLPs (ranging from 4 layers
and 13M parameters, up to 40 layers and 13B parameters), that are used as the basis for
multiple projects at Anthropic.
“Smeared key models”, a targeted architectural experiment designed to allow transformers of
any depth to express induction heads.
The dataset used for training the small models and smeared key models was an earlier version of
the dataset described in Askell et al. , consisting of filtered common crawl data  and internetbooks, along with several other smaller distributions, including approximately 10% python code.
The full-scale models were trained on an improved version of roughly the same data distribution.Additionally, another set of the small models was trained on a different dataset, consisting of just
internet books, to explore the impact of varying the dataset. All models trained on a given dataset
saw the same examples in the same order. Models never saw the same training data twice.
[18] [19]
[20]
For more details on model architecture and training, continue past the table below, to the Model
Details section.
In the Model Analysis Table below, each row includes a brief summary of the measurement shown.
For a more in-depth explanation of the data collection and results analysis, see the Appendix.


===== PAGE 30 =====



===== PAGE 31 =====



===== PAGE 32 =====



===== PAGE 33 =====



===== PAGE 34 =====



===== PAGE 35 =====



===== PAGE 36 =====



===== PAGE 37 =====



===== PAGE 38 =====



===== PAGE 39 =====
Model Details
SMALL MODELS
The small models are 1- through 6-layer Transformers. These include models both with MLPs and
without MLPs (i.e. “attention only” models). They have a context window of 8192 tokens, a216 token vocabulary, an activation dimension dmodel = 768, and 12 attention heads per layer
regardless of total model size. They were trained for 10,000 steps (~10 billion tokens), saving 200
snapshots at intervals of every 50 steps. Their positional embeddings are implemented with avariant on the standard positional embeddings (similar to Press et al. ). The training dataset is
described earlier at the start of the Model Analysis Table.
[17]
We observe a “phase change” phenomenon that appears at approximately 1-3 billion tokens in the
small models. It might be reasonable to ask whether these phenomena are driven by scheduledchanges to the hyperparameters, such as learning rate or weight decay. Weight decay was reduced
at 4750 steps (approximately 5 billion tokens), the effects of which can be seen as a slight deviationabout halfway through the displayed loss curves, occurring at the exact same point for all models;
this is not related to the phase change, as this step number is notably beyond the range in which
the phase change occurs. The only other hyperparameter change that occurs within the range ofthe phase change is the learning rate warm-up, which ramps up over the first 1.5e9 tokens.
FULL-SCALE MODELS
The “full-scale models” are from the same set of models as described in Askell et al.  Thecontext window and vocabulary size are the same as the small models (that is, 8192 tokens and
216 tokens respectively). Unlike the small models, their dimensions are adjusted to scale up withincreasing size, with an activation dimension , and a varying number of
attention heads (See   Appendix for full details). The models have both dense and local attention
heads. In a local attention head, each token may only attend to earlier tokens within a fixed windowof relative positions. Dense heads are the standard head, where a token may attend to any earlier
token (including itself). The training dataset is described earlier at the start of the Model AnalysisTable.
[18]
d  =128∗n  
model layer
Snapshots from these models were saved at exponential step numbers, at an interval of 2x. For our
analyses we use snapshots at steps from 2^5 through 2^17, plus one or two final saves thereafter,for a total of 15 saved snapshots (except the 40L which has 14 saved snapshots).This
corresponds to a consistent number of tokens across all models up through 2^11 steps (= 2.15E+09tokens), after which adjustments to the training schedule cause the number of tokens per step to
increase for the 24L and 40L models.
26


===== PAGE 40 =====
TABLE OF MODEL PROPERTIES FOR FULL-SCALE MODELS
Non-embeddingparameter counts Activation dimension Attention headsper layer Attentiondimension 
4 13M 512 8 64
6 42M 768 12 64
10 200M 1280 20 64
16 810M 2048 32 64
24 2.7B 3072 48 64
40 13B 5120 40 128
n ayerl d  =128∗n  
model layer d  
head
SMEARED KEY MODELS
The “smeared key” architecture modification described in Argument 2 is as follows: we introduce atrainable real parameter  used as  that interpolates between the key for the current
token and previous token:
(In the case of the very first token in the context, no interpolation happens). These models were
otherwise proportioned and trained exactly the same as the small models. We present these only atone-layer and two-layer sizes.
α σ(α)∈[0,1]
k =σ(α)k +(1−σ(α))k  
j j j−1
Unexplained Curiosities
As with all scientific investigations, in the course of this work weʼve encountered a few unexplained
phenomena. In this section, we discuss these and provide very preliminary investigations of a fewthat were especially surprising.
Seemingly Constant In-Context Learning Score
One of the stranger observations in this paper is that in-context learning score (as we've defined it:the loss of the 500th token in the context minus the loss of the 50th token in the context) is more or
less the same for all models after the phase change. It appears to not matter whether the model is atiny two layer model or a fairly large 13 billion parameter model, nor whether the model has just
gone through the phase change or trained much longer. The only thing that matters, seemingly, is
whether the model has gone through the phase change at all.
A natural question is whether this might be an artifact of the relatively arbitrary definition. Afterall,
there's no reason to privilege token index 50 or 500 in the context. But it appears that varying thesedoesn't matter. In the following plot, we show how the large models' "in-context learning score"
varies if we define it instead as the difference between the loss at the final token in the context(8192) and other indices. While there are small differences between models – for some definitions,
small models would do slightly more "in-context learning"!– all definitions appear to show that
the amount of in-context learning varies only slightly between models.
27


===== PAGE 41 =====
How can this be? First, it's important to be clear that large models still predict tokens at all indices
better than small models, and they're best at predicting later tokens. What's going on is that thelarge models gain all their advantage over small models very early in the context. In fact, the
majority of the difference forms in the first ten tokens:
It seems that large models are able to pull a lot of information out of the very early context. (This
might partly be, as an example, because their increased world knowledge mean they don't need togain as much information from the context.) They then further decrease their loss by a roughly fixed
amount over the remainder of the context.It seems likely this fixed amount is in some sense"more difficult in-context learning" for large models, since they're starting from a lower loss
baseline. While it still seems mysterious to us why models should have the same in-context learning
score, this perspective makes it "strange" rather than "shocking".
28
Phase Change Effect on Loss Derivatives
Another observation we find quite striking is that if one looks at the derivative of the loss curves ofmodels of different sizes, it appears that their order switches at the phase change. This is most
easily seen by plotting the derivative of loss with respect to the log of elapsed tokens (since losscurves are often most easily reasoned about on a log x-axis). The key observation is that the loss
decreases more slowly for small models than large models before the phase change, but the
opposite is true after.


===== PAGE 42 =====
While it doesn't seem that surprising that small models learn more quickly in early training, it is
striking that this inversion seems to coincide with the phase change. It's another piece of evidencethat suggests the phase change is an important transition point in the training of transformers.
Additional Curiosities
In the model analysis table:
The 6-layer attention-only model has an unusual head that develops in the later half of
training. This head is not an induction head, and yet ablating it has an effect similar toreversing the phase change (in the “before-and-after vector” attribution plot). What is this
head?
The 4-layer MLP model ablations are nowhere near as “peaky” as those of any other model.What is different about this modelʼs development?
The 6-layer MLP model shows a “loss spike”. We donʼt yet know what causes loss spikes.
The 6-layer MLP model has one lone induction head whose ablation has the opposite effecton the in-context learning score. What is this head?
And in the Appendix:
Full-scale models above 16 layers start to show a small number of heads that score well on“prefix search”, but get a negative score on copying, which means they are not induction
heads. What can we learn about these “anti-copying prefix-search” heads?


===== PAGE 43 =====
Discussion
Safety Implications
The ultimate motivation of our research is the theory that reverse engineering neural networks mighthelp us be confident in their safety. Our work is only a very preliminary step towards that goal, but it
it does begin to approach several safety-relevant issues:
Phase changes: If neural network behavior discontinuously changes from one scale to the next,
this makes it more challenging for researchers and society to prepare for future problems.
In-Context Learning: In-context learning has been a topic of concerned speculation in the safety
community. With less-capable neural networks, one might be tempted to treat their behavior asrelatively fixed after training. (That said, demonstrations of adversarial reprogramming  shed
some doubt on this assumption.) In-context learning highlights that model behavior can in somesense “change” during inference, without further training. Even if we think of in-context learning as
“locating” an already-learned behavior, rather than learning something new, the behavior could
be a surprising and unwanted off-distribution generalization.
[21]
[22]
Mesa-Optimization: There have been some concerns that the underlying mechanism of in-context
learning might be mesa-optimization, a hypothesized situation where models develop aninternal optimization algorithm. Our work suggests that the primary mechanism of in-context
learning, at least in small models, is induction heads. We did not observe any evidence of mesa-optimizers.
[14]
Linking Learning Dynamics, Scaling Laws, and MechanisticInterpretability
The in-context-learning phase change may be a useful "Rosetta stone" linking mechanistic
interpretability, learning dynamics, and statistical physics-like empirical properties of neuralnetworks (e.g. scaling laws or phase changes). If one wants to investigate the intersections of these
lines of work, the phase change seems like an ideal starting point: a concrete example where these
lines of inquiry are intertwined, which can be explored in small models, bounded in a small sliver ofthe training process, and is linked to a capability (in-context learning) the community is excited
about.
[23]
Related Work
The general approach of this paper to reverse engineering transformers is based heavily on our
previous paper, A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits. There is much to be said abouthow that framework relates to other work in interpretability. Rather than repeating it, we refer
readers to Related Work in our previous paper, especially discussion of the relationship to circuits, to analysis of attention heads (e.g. ), and to related mathematical analysis (e.g. 
).
[6] [24, 25, 26, 27, 28]
[29]


===== PAGE 44 =====
Building on that perspective, we here focus on how aspects of this paper raise new connections to
the machine learning literature, separate from the connections raised simply by the underlyingframework.
IN-CONTEXT LEARNING
Emergent in-context learning was compellingly demonstrated in GPT-3 . A number of papershave studied how to effectively leverage in-context learning, especially with "prompt engineering"
. But of particular importance to us, several papers have tried to study how and when in-context learning occurs (e.g. ).
[1]
[11, 12]
[13, 30, 31, 32]
Some of the findings of these papers are consistent with the induction head hypothesis, or support
our methodology:
Kaplan et al.  is the origin of our approach for using loss at different token indices as a
formalism for studying in-context learning.
OʼConnor & Andreas  find that preserving word order in contexts is important, as the
induction head hypothesis would suggest.
[13]
[30]
However, there are also places where experiments in these papers seem in tension with the
induction head hypothesis:
OʼConnor & Andreas have some experiments suggesting that removing all words except
nouns can improve loss. This seems inconsistent with the induction head hypothesis.However, they only find this for experiments where they retrain the model on modified data.
This seems both less directly related to our work (because we aim to study models trained on
natural data) and subtle to interpret (because retraining models introduces the possibility ofrun-to-run loss variation, and the measured loss differences are small). The experiments
where they don't retrain models on modified data seem consistent with the induction headhypothesis.
Xie et al.  finds that LSTMs outperform Transformers when fit to synthetic data generated
by a Hidden Markov Model (HHM) designed to isolate a particular theoretical model of in-context learning. We generally expect Transformers to outperform LSTMs at in-context
learning on natural text (as seen in Kaplan et al. ), with induction heads as a majorexplanation. But in the case of the Xie et al. experiments (which donʼt use natural text), we
suspect that the structure of the synthetic data doesn't benefit from Transformers, and that
LSTMs are perhaps better at simulating HMMs.
[30]
[31]
[13]
Note that we are using a broader conception of “in-context learning”, rather than something as
specific as “few-shot learning”. This is in contrast with Brown et al., which describes that alanguage model “develops a broad set of skills and pattern recognition abilities. It then uses these
abilities at inference time to rapidly adapt to or recognize the desired task,” with examples of taskssuch as few-digit addition and typo correction. In our conception of “in-context learning”, we refer
to all the ways that a model rapidly adapts to or recognizes what is going on in the context, even if
“what is going on in the context” isnʼt well-conceived-of as multiple “shots” of some other specificrepeated task.
[1]
SCALING LAWS
Over the last few years, the observation that machine learning models change in smooth,predictable ways described by scaling laws  has emerged as a useful tool for modelling the
properties of models before training them.
[13]


===== PAGE 45 =====
The relationship between scaling laws and mechanistic interpretability might be seen as analogous
to the relationship between thermodynamics and the physics of individual particles. For boththermodynamics and scaling laws, even though the underlying system is very complicated, we're
able to find simple relationships between the variables – for thermodynamics: entropy, temperature,volume and pressure; for neural networks: loss, compute, parameters, and data. In contrast,
mechanistic interpretability studies the individual circuits underlying our models, vaguely analogous
to how one might carefully study individual particles in physics. In physics, these two layers ofabstraction were bridged by statistical physics.
Can we bridge these two levels of abstraction in machine learning? The induction head phase
change is the first time we're aware of a bridge. They give us a phenomenon at the level ofmacroscopic properties at loss which can be explained at the level of circuits and mechanistic
interpretability.
In fact, induction heads may be able to explain previous observed exceptions to scaling laws. In our
work, 1-layer transformers seem very different from deeper transformers. This was previouslyobserved by Kaplan et al.  who found that 1-layer transformers do not follow the same scaling
laws as larger transformers. It seems quite plausible that the reason why the scaling laws aredifferent for one-layer models is that they don't have induction heads.
[13]
PHASE CHANGES & DISCONTINUOUS MODEL BEHAVIOR
In the previous section, we discussed how scaling laws describe smooth predictable relationshipsbetween model loss and properties like scale. However, a more recent set of results have made the
situation seem more subtle. While modelsʼ losses often scale in predictable ways, there are caseswhere behavior is more complex:
Brown et al.  find that, while aggregate loss scales predictably with model size, modelsʼ
ability to perform specific tasks like arithmetic can change abruptly.
Power et al.  observe a phenomenon they call "grokking" where models discontinuously
jump from random chance to perfect generalization as they train.
Double Descent  is a phenomenon where model performance first gets worse due to
overfitting as one makes a model larger (the "classical” regime), but then gets better again
past a certain point (the "modern" regime). Generalizations of double descent can occur withrespect to parameter size, dataset size, or amount of training . These phenomena are not
discontinuous in loss, but they are surprising trend reversals, and perhaps discontinuous inderivatives.
[1]
[8]
[33]
[34]
For more general discussion of these phase change phenomena, see a recent blog post by
Steinhardt .[35]
The discontinuous phase change behavior we observe with induction heads is most analogous to
Power et al. 's "grokking", in that it occurs over the course of training. We think our maincontribution to this literature is linking the changes we observe to the formation of induction heads
and a parameter-level understanding of the circuits involved. As far as we know, induction heads arethe first case where a mechanistic account has been provided for a phase change in machine
learning.
[8]


===== PAGE 46 =====
LEARNING DYNAMICS
If neural networks can genuinely be understood mechanistically, in terms of circuits, it seems likethere almost has to be some way to understand the learning process in terms of the dynamics of
circuits changing. Induction heads offer an interesting preliminary bridge between these topics, andare a source of optimism for such a connection. This section will briefly review some strands of
work on the learning dynamics side, which seem particularly promising to think about if one wanted
to pursue such a connection further.
One remarkable result in learning dynamics, by Saxe et al , has been the discovery of closed
form solutions to learning dynamics for linear neural networks without activation functions. Theexciting thing about this work is that it actually provides a simple way to conceptually think about
neural network learning in a simplified case. (In follow up work, Saxe et al also explore connectionsbetween this framework and models learning to represent semantic information .) We're unable
to provide a detailed review of this work here, but we note that Saxe et al's framework could
naturally suggest a circuit lens for thinking about learning dynamics. Very roughly, they find thatlinear neural networks can be understood in terms of the evolution of independent paths through
the network, with each path corresponding to a principal component of the data. These paths mightbe thought of as circuits.
[23]
[36]
Another interesting line of work has been the study of the geometry of neural network loss surfaces
(e.g. ). Here, our thoughts on the connection are more superficial, but it seems likethere must be some way in which aspects of the loss surface connect to the formation of circuits.
Very concretely, it seems like the phase change we've described in this paper must correspond tosome very large feature in the loss landscape of transformers.
[37, 38, 39, 40]
UNIVERSALITY
In the context of interpretability and circuits, "universality" or "convergent learning" is whenmultiple models develop the same features and circuits. Universality might seem like an intellectual
curiosity, but the circuits thread argues that universality plays a critical role in what kind ofinterpretability makes sense:
[I]magine the study of anatomy in a world where every species of animal had a completely
unrelated anatomy: would we seriously study anything other than humans and a coupledomestic animals? In the same way, the universality hypothesis determines what form of
circuits research makes sense. If it was true in the strongest sense, one could imagine a kind of“periodic table of visual features” which we observe and catalogue across models. On the
other hand, if it was mostly false, we would need to focus on a handful of models of particular
societal importance and hope they stop changing every year.   
[41] [42]
[41]
Research on universality began with Li et al.  who showed that many neurons are highly
correlated with neurons in retrained versions of the same model. More recently, a number of papershave shown that in aggregate, neural networks develop representations with a lot of shared
information (e.g. ). The Circuits thread tried to extend this notion of universality from featuresto circuits, finding that not only do at least some families of well-characterized neurons reoccur
across multiple networks of different architectures and that the same circuits , but the same
circuits appear to implement them .
[42]
[43, 44]
[41]
[45]


===== PAGE 47 =====
Certain kinds of universality are often implicitly assumed in the language model attention head
interpretability literature. For example, it seems widely accepted that "previous token" attentionheads form across many transformer language models (e.g. ). The implicit hypothesis of
universal attention heads – that is, attention heads with the same attention patterns in differentmodels – isn't exactly the same thing as the kind of feature universality studied in the vision context,
but is kind of analogous.
[26, 27]
Our work in this paper has analogies to many of these strands of prior work. Like the previous
attention head papers, we describe the induction head pattern as a universal attention pattern.However, our analysis of these headsʼ OV and QK circuits extends this claim of universality to the
circuit level, similar to the original Circuits thread. And a corollary of our analysis of the OV circuit isa claim about what feature the attention head computes (roughly: the token embedding of the token
following a previous copy of the present token) which is more similar to the traditional work on
universality.
Separate from all of this, it's worth mentioning that increasingly there's evidence for a particularly
extreme kind of universality at the intersection of neuroscience and deep learning. Increasingly,research suggests that biological and artificial neural networks learn similar representations (e.g. 
). In fact, Goh et al.  find that multimodal "concept" neurons found in humans (such asthe famous "Jennifer Anniston neuron") occur in neural networks.
[46, 47, 48] [49]
ATTENTION PATTERNS IN TRANSLATION-LIKE TASKS
In Argument 4, we saw an induction head that helps implement translation. Although we're notaware of anything quite so general in the prior literature, there are reports of attention patterns
which, in retrospect, seem somewhat similar. Often, in translation-like tasks, we see attentionattend to the token which is about to be translated. We see this in literal translation (e.g. ) and
also in voice recognition (e.g.  where the model attends to the portion of the audio about to be
transcribed). Visualizations of this in the encoder-decoder context often slightly obscure theinduction-like nature of the attention patterns, because the decoder is visualized in terms of the
output tokens predicted per time step rather than its input tokens.
[50]
[51]
Comments & Replications
Inspired by the original Circuits Thread and Distill's Discussion Article experiment, the authors
invited several external researchers who were also investigating induction heads to comment onthis work. Their comments are included below.


===== PAGE 48 =====
REPLICATION
Adam Scherlis is a researcher at Redwood Research.
Redwood Research has been working on language model interpretability, inspired in part by
Anthropicʼs work. Weʼve found induction heads reliably appearing in two-layer attention-onlytransformers. Their structure roughly matches the description in “Analyzing a Two-Layer
Model” from Anthropicʼs previous paper, with previous-token heads in layer 0 and inductionheads in layer 1 (often one of each). These each have the expected attention behaviors. We
tested this by replacing attention-score matrices with idealized versions and comparing the
change in loss to the change from ablating that head. Replacing the previous-token headʼsscores with exact previous-token attention recovered 99% of the loss difference. Replacing the
induction headʼs scores with a simple approximation (attending to the first token and to exact[A][B]...[A] matches) recovered about 65% of the loss difference. Our induction heads
also match patterns of the form [A][B][C]...[A][B] → [C]; including this in the substituted
attention scores recovered an additional 10% of loss difference. The induction headʼs OV circuitcopies tokens, including some fuzzy matching of semantically similar tokens. Its QK circuit is
dominated by K-composition with the previous-token head; the previous-token headʼs OVmatrix copies information to a new subspace and the induction headʼs QK matrix copies it back
to the usual token embedding. Weʼve also cataloged a few other kinds of attention heads,
including skip-trigram heads.
REPLICATION
Tom Lieberum is a master's student at the University of Amsterdam.
I used the empirical criterion for induction heads presented in this paper to look for induction
heads in publicly available models. To reiterate: on a sequence of tokens[A][B] .... [A] →  [B], a head is called an induction head if it attends to the previous
[B] when reading the last [A], and if the previous [B] increased the logit of the last [B].
Under this definition, I found potential induction heads in GPT2 and GPT-Neo mostly starting in
the mid-depth region. I made an interactive version to explore attention and logit attribution
across all layers and heads on the long Harry Potter prompt with the repetition of the firstparagraph. It can be accessed here. For example, for GPT2-XL, head 20 in layer 21 seems to be
an induction head, as well as head 0 in layer 12 of GPT-Neo-2.7B. For these heads we can seethat virtually every token in the repetition of the first paragraph attends to its following token in
the original paragraph. Thanks to EleutherAI for providing the compute resources for this
project.
At one point the paper speculates on the minimal context length necessary to form induction
heads. On a synthetic dataset, I have already found induction to be easily learned with acontext length of 4. However, I believe that this is, in general, a property of the dataset/data
distribution rather than the model itself, i.e. "how useful is induction for this task, on this
dataset?". While it is intriguing to think about the statistics of language in this way, I am not surehow useful this line of research would be to the overall project of interpretability.


===== PAGE 49 =====
Change Log
The following changes have been made after publication:
2022-09-20: Corrects the definition of Prefix matching in two places, which incorrectly stated “tokens that
were preceded by the current token” instead of “preceded” or “were followed by”. Adds detail to the definition of
the copying head evaluator to explain that the effect on “raising the logits” is calculated using a ReLU.
Footnotes
 . Note that mechanistic interpretability is a subset of the broader field of interpretability, which encompasses many
different methods for explaining the outputs of a neural network. Mechanistic interpretability is distinguished by a
specific focus on trying to systematically characterize the internal circuitry of a neural net.[ ↩ ]
 . Note that induction heads donʼt occur in 1 layer models, because they require a composition of attention heads in
different layers.[ ↩ ]
 . Or sometimes metalearning, although this term implicitly makes the stronger claim that the model is learning how to do a
new ability (as opposed to “locating” an ability, i.e. learning what it is supposed to do), an implication which is both
controversial and not entirely precise in its meaning.[ ↩ ]
 . More specifically, induction heads seem to largely decouple A and B. While some induction heads may specialize on
certain kinds of As or Bs, this significant decoupling of A and B means that they don't have a fixed table of bigram
statistics they can update on, but rather can abstract to new patterns.[ ↩ ]
 . In practice, induction heads don't exhibit these properties perfectly, and our measurements give us a continuum, but
there is a clear subset of heads which exhibit these properties with much greater than random chance.[ ↩ ]
 . By defining induction heads in terms of their behavior on repeated copies of random sequences, we can be confident
that it's actually relying on induction rather than, say, a simple copying head that heuristically attends to previous tokens
which could plausibly slot in well after the next token, even if that hasnʼt occurred yet in the current context.[ ↩ ]
 . The simplest induction heads match just one preceding token. But we also often observe induction heads that perform a
fuzzy match over several preceding tokens.[ ↩ ]
 . In mathematics, one sometimes thinks of a function as an infinite dimensional vector of the values it would give for
different inputs. For neural networks, this can be a nice way to abstract away the fact that functionally identical models
can have very different parameter vectors. Of course, we can't directly represent these infinite dimensional vectors, but
we can approximate them by sampling.[ ↩ ]
 . Although see later discussion for a way in which a constant 0.4 nats can be viewed as a “larger” improvement for a more-
powerful model, because attaining the same magnitude of improvement starting from a better baseline is more
challenging.[ ↩ ]
  . As we'll see, many other curious phenomena occur during the phase change as well.[ ↩ ]
  . That said, itʼs also the case that aside from the experiments varying the dataset, all these models were trained on the
same tokens in the same order[ ↩ ]
  . Of course, this passage is merely a single piece of anecdata, shown here to provide a qualitative intuition rather than
meant as systematic evidence. For a more comprehensive analysis of the observed behavioral change before and after
the phase change, consult the “ablation to before-and-after vector” analyses in the Model Analysis Table[ ↩ ]
  . Some bits of information are harder to learn than others. For example, near the start of training, the model can achieve a
significant decrease in loss with simple approaches such as memorizing bigram statistics. But later in training all the low-
hanging fruit has been plucked, and the model must learn more sophisticated algorithms such as induction heads, which
is likely harder to learn yet results in fewer bits of information. In todayʼs state of the art models, such as GPT-3, we
observe complex capabilities such as addition, and we can imagine future models approaching near-perfect loss might
need human-level understanding of language and beyond to get those last few fractions of a bit.  So the relative loss
between token 50 and token 500 likely represents harder and harder bits over the course of training.[ ↩ ]
  . It is still a mystery why these forces of increased capacity for in-context learning and increasing difficulty of marginal bits
would so exactly balance, and this seems a promising avenue of future research. Perhaps there is not, in fact, much
[16]


===== PAGE 50 =====
overlap in the information that could be gained from both in-context learning and other approaches, so these bits do not
get harder with time. We'll revisit this in the Discussion.[ ↩ ]
  . Why do induction heads require composition? In an induction head, where the head attends must be a function of the
token before the token it attends to. But an individual attention head computes attention scores only from the source and
destination token. Without using information written by a second earlier attention head, the score from the attended
token canʼt be a function of the token that precedes it.[ ↩ ]
  . The key vector for the first token is unchanged.[ ↩ ]
  . In fact, ablating most other attention heads appears to increase in-context learning. At first, that seems kind of crazy:
how could damaging the model make it better at in-context learning? It appears that some tokens can be predicted with
both "normal prediction" and in-context learning. If ablating a head makes the model bad at "normal prediction", in-
context learning can predict more tokens that otherwise wouldn't be predicted, and in-context learning score as we've
defined it increases.[ ↩ ]
  . Note that the cost of a full set of ablations scales superlinearly with model size at , since there are 
heads and each ablation is  where  is the number of parameters. The base cost of an ablation is also non-trivial,
since we're evaluating each ablation on 10,000 examples, for each training checkpoint.[ ↩ ]
  . In attention-only models, the logits can be expressed (up to a rescaling due to LayerNorm) as a sum of terms from each
attention head, along with a "direct path term" to the the token embedding (see our previous paper). The direct path
term is solely a function of the present token, so it can't contribute to in-context learning. That means that all in-context
learning must ultimately originate with attention heads, and since the relationship is almost linear, ablations (with frozen
attention patterns) are a principled way to measure their contribution.[ ↩ ]
  . Why is ablating attention heads harder to reason about if they can interact with MLP layers? At a high-level, the issue is
that in-context learning is a complicated function of which heads are ablated, rather than a sum of their contributions.
But it may be helpful to consider specific examples. One possibility is that ablating a head might shift the statistics of an
MLP layer and "break" neurons by shifting their effective bias, without actually having a meaningful role. Another
possibility is that an important MLP layer mechanism relies on two attention heads, but can function reasonably well with
one if the other is albated. [ ↩ ]
  . We compute this by taking the value vector produced at each position, weighting it by the attention matrix, and
multiplying it by  and the unembedding, and selecting the logit value for the corresponding token. Note that we first
normalise the vector of logits to have zero mean, as adding a constant to every argument in a softmax has no effect.[ ↩ ]
  . For example, a special case of translating from English to another language is translating English to itself, which is
precisely the same as literal copying.[ ↩ ]
  . The only other potential contender for driving in-context learning in two-layer attention only models would be basic
copying heads. However, basic copying heads also exist in one-layer models, which don't have the greatly increased in-
context learning we see in two-layer models. Further, induction heads just seem conceptually more powerful.[ ↩ ]
  . Note that the attended token is only ignored when calculating the attention pattern through the QK-circuit. It is extremely
important for calculating the headʼs output through the OV-circuit! As observed in our previous work, the parts of the
head that calculate the attention pattern, and the output if attended to, are separable and are often useful to consider
independently.[ ↩ ]
  . Instead, they use a slightly unusual positional mechanism similar to Press et al.[ ↩ ]
  . Note that this is different to the small models, which have 200 snapshots saved at linear intervals. As the full-scale
models have only 14 or 15 snapshots, this makes it harder to judge the shape of the curves as confidently as for small
models.[ ↩ ]
  . Around token 100, there's a regime where small models reduce their loss very slightly more per token than large models.
We interpret this as the small models picking up low-hanging fruit that the large models already got in the very early
context.[ ↩ ]
  . In fact, small models gain slightly more in the mid-context, catching up a  tiny bit with large models, but it's a small
effect.[ ↩ ]
  . The fact that this is possible at all is a surprising application of the insight in our previous work that the calculation of
each attention headʼs attention pattern and output vector is separable, that is, implemented by different circuits
consisting of different sets of parameters which may be run and studied in isolation[ ↩ ]
  . As an interesting aside, we note that with the attention pattern frozen the action of each head is purely linear, which
means that in an attention-only model, a pattern-preserving ablation is equivalent to subtracting all terms containing the
ablated head from the output logits. See our previous work for further exploration of the implications of this. This does
not hold in more complex models, due to the non-linearity introduced by MLPs[ ↩ ]
O(N )1.33 O(N )0.33
O(N) N
W 
O
[17]


===== PAGE 51 =====
References
 . Language models are few-shot learners[PDF]
Brown, T.B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A.
and others,, 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165.
 . LaMDA: our breakthrough conversation technology[link]
Collins, E. and Ghahramani, Z., 2021.
 . Evaluating large language models trained on code
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H.P.d.O., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G. and
others,, 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
 . Towards a human-like open-domain chatbot
Adiwardana, D., Luong, M., So, D.R., Hall, J., Fiedel, N., Thoppilan, R., Yang, Z., Kulshreshtha, A., Nemade, G., Lu, Y. and
others,, 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977.
 . Scaling Language Models: Methods, Analysis & Insights from Training Gopher[PDF]
Rae, J.W., Borgeaud, S., Cai, T., Millican, K., Hoffmann, J., Song, F., Aslanides, J., Henderson, S., Ring, R., Young, S.,
Rutherford, E., Hennigan, T., Menick, J., Cassirer, A., Powell, R., Driessche, G.v.d., Hendricks, L.A., Rauh, M., Huang, P.,
Glaese, A., Welbl, J., Dathathri, S., Huang, S., Uesato, J., Mellor, J., Higgins, I., Creswell, A., McAleese, N., Wu, A., Elsen,
E., Jayakumar, S., Buchatskaya, E., Budden, D., Sutherland, E., Simonyan, K., Paganini, M., Sifre, L., Martens, L., Li, X.L.,
Kuncoro, A., Nematzadeh, A., Gribovskaya, E., Donato, D., Lazaridou, A., Mensch, A., Lespiau, J., Tsimpoukelli, M.,
Grigorev, N., Fritz, D., Sottiaux, T., Pajarskas, M., Pohlen, T., Gong, Z., Toyama, D., dʼAutume, C.d.M., Li, Y., Terzi, T.,
Mikulik, V., Babuschkin, I., Clark, A., Casas, D.d.L., Guy, A., Jones, C., Bradbury, J., Johnson, M., Hechtman, B.,
Weidinger, L., Gabriel, I., Isaac, W., Lockhart, E., Osindero, S., Rimell, L., Dyer, C., Vinyals, O., Ayoub, K., Stanway, J.,
Bennett, L., Hassabis, D., Kavukcuoglu, K. and Irving, G., 2021. Preprint.
 . Thread: Circuits[link]
Cammarata, N., Carter, S., Goh, G., Olah, C., Petrov, M., Schubert, L., Voss, C., Egan, B. and Lim, S.K., 2020. Distill.
 . A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits[HTML]
Elhage, N., Nanda, N., Olsson, C., Henighan, T., Joseph, N., Mann, B., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Conerly, T., DasSarma,
N., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Hernandez, D., Jones, A., Kernion, J., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K., Amodei, D.,
Brown, T., Clark, J., Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S. and Olah, C., 2021. Transformer Circuits Thread.
 . Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets
Power, A., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Babuschkin, I. and Misra, V., 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177.
 . The Effects of Reward Misspecification: Mapping and Mitigating Misaligned Models[link]
Pan, A., Bhatia, K. and Steinhardt, J., 2022. International Conference on Learning Representations.
  . Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners[PDF]
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D. and Sutskever, I., 2019.
  . Calibrate Before Use: Improving Few-Shot Performance of Language Models
Zhao, T.Z., Wallace, E., Feng, S., Klein, D. and Singh, S., 2021.
  . Making Pre-trained Language Models Better Few-shot Learners
Gao, T., Fisch, A. and Chen, D., 2021.
  . Scaling laws for neural language models
Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T.B., Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J. and Amodei, D.,
2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361.
  . Risks from Learned Optimization in Advanced Machine Learning Systems
Hubinger, E., Merwijk, C.v., Mikulik, V., Skalse, J. and Garrabrant, S., 2021.
  . Why does unsupervised pre-training help deep learning?[link]
Erhan, D., Courville, A., Bengio, Y. and Vincent, P., 2010. Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on
artificial intelligence and statistics, pp. 201--208.
  . The Scaling Hypothesis[link]
Branwen, G., 2020.
  . Shortformer: Better language modeling using shorter inputs
Press, O., Smith, N.A. and Lewis, M., 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15832.
  . It wouldʼve been better if we had used a start of sequence token for the copying head evaluator as well, but we omitted it
by mistake. Without the “start of sequence” token, some heads that were doing prefix matching on real data would get
anomalously low scores on our test sequences[ ↩ ]


===== PAGE 52 =====
,,, ,, pp
  . A General Language Assistant as a Laboratory for Alignment
Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Henighan, T., Jones, A., Joseph, N., Mann, B., DasSarma, N. and
others,, 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861.
  . Common Crawl[link]
Foundation, T.C.C..
  . The Pile: An 800GB Dataset of Diverse Text for Language Modeling
Gao, L., Biderman, S., Black, S., Golding, L., Hoppe, T., Foster, C., Phang, J., He, H., Thite, A., Nabeshima, N., Presser, S.
and Leahy, C., 2020.
  . Adversarial Reprogramming of Neural Networks
Elsayed, G.F., Goodfellow, I. and Sohl-Dickstein, J., 2018.
  . Prompt Programming for Large Language Models: Beyond the Few-Shot Paradigm
Reynolds, L. and McDonell, K., 2021.
  . Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks
Saxe, A.M., McClelland, J.L. and Ganguli, S., 2014.
  . Tensor2tensor transformer visualization[link]
Jones, L., 2017.
  . A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model[PDF]
Vig, J., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05714.
  . Analyzing multi-head self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned[PDF]
Voita, E., Talbot, D., Moiseev, F., Sennrich, R. and Titov, I., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09418.
  . What does bert look at? an analysis of bert's attention[PDF]
Clark, K., Khandelwal, U., Levy, O. and Manning, C.D., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341.
  . Do attention heads in bert track syntactic dependencies?[PDF]
Htut, P.M., Phang, J., Bordia, S. and Bowman, S.R., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12246.
  . Attention is not all you need: Pure attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth[PDF]
Dong, Y., Cordonnier, J. and Loukas, A., 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03404.
  . What Context Features Can Transformer Language Models Use?
O'Connor, J. and Andreas, J., 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08367.
  . An Explanation of In-context Learning as Implicit Bayesian Inference
Xie, S.M., Raghunathan, A., Liang, P. and Ma, T., 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080.
  . Rethinking the Role of Demonstrations: What Makes In-Context Learning Work?
Min, S., Lyu, X., Holtzman, A., Artetxe, M., Lewis, M., Hajishirzi, H. and Zettlemoyer, L., 2022. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.12837.
  . Reconciling modern machine-learning practice and the classical bias--variance trade-off
Belkin, M., Hsu, D., Ma, S. and Mandal, S., 2019. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol 116(32), pp.
15849--15854. National Acad Sciences.
  . Deep double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt
Nakkiran, P., Kaplun, G., Bansal, Y., Yang, T., Barak, B. and Sutskever, I., 2021. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
and Experiment, Vol 2021(12), pp. 124003. IOP Publishing.
  . Future ML Systems Will Be Qualitatively Different[link]
Steinhardt, J., 2021. Bounded Regret.
  . A mathematical theory of semantic development in deep neural networks
Saxe, A.M., McClelland, J.L. and Ganguli, S., 2019. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol 116(23), pp.
11537--11546. National Acad Sciences.
  . Qualitatively characterizing neural network optimization problems
Goodfellow, I.J., Vinyals, O. and Saxe, A.M., 2014. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6544.
  . Analyzing monotonic linear interpolation in neural network loss landscapes
Lucas, J., Bae, J., Zhang, M.R., Fort, S., Zemel, R. and Grosse, R., 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.11044.
  . Geometry of neural network loss surfaces via random matrix theory
Pennington, J. and Bahri, Y., 2017. International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2798--2806.


===== PAGE 53 =====
  . Visualizing the loss landscape of neural nets
Li, H., Xu, Z., Taylor, G., Studer, C. and Goldstein, T., 2018. Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol 31.
  . Zoom In: An Introduction to Circuits
Olah, C., Cammarata, N., Schubert, L., Goh, G., Petrov, M. and Carter, S., 2020. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.001
  . Convergent learning: Do different neural networks learn the same representations?
Li, Y., Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Lipson, H., Hopcroft, J.E. and others,, 2015. FE@ NIPS, pp. 196--212.
  . SVCCA: Singular Vector Canonical Correlation Analysis for Deep Learning Dynamics and Interpretability[PDF]
Raghu, M., Gilmer, J., Yosinski, J. and Sohl-Dickstein, J., 2017. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30,
pp. 6078--6087. Curran Associates, Inc.
  . Similarity of neural network representations revisited[PDF]
Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Lee, H. and Hinton, G., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00414.
  . High-Low Frequency Detectors
Schubert, L., Voss, C., Cammarata, N., Goh, G. and Olah, C., 2021. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.005
  . Performance-optimized hierarchical models predict neural responses in higher visual cortex
Yamins, D.L., Hong, H., Cadieu, C.F., Solomon, E.A., Seibert, D. and DiCarlo, J.J., 2014. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, Vol 111(23), pp. 8619--8624. National Acad Sciences.
  . Deep neural networks reveal a gradient in the complexity of neural representations across the ventral stream
Güçlü, U. and van Gerven, M.A., 2015. Journal of Neuroscience, Vol 35(27), pp. 10005--10014. Soc Neuroscience.
  . Seeing it all: Convolutional network layers map the function of the human visual system
Eickenberg, M., Gramfort, A., Varoquaux, G. and Thirion, B., 2017. NeuroImage, Vol 152, pp. 184--194. Elsevier.
  . Multimodal Neurons in Artificial Neural Networks
Goh, G., Cammarata, N., Voss, C., Carter, S., Petrov, M., Schubert, L., Radford, A. and Olah, C., 2021. Distill. DOI:
10.23915/distill.00030
  . Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K. and Bengio, Y., 2014. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473.
  . Listen, attend and spell
Chan, W., Jaitly, N., Le, Q.V. and Vinyals, O., 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01211.
Acknowledgments
In writing this paper, our thinking and exposition was greatly clarified by detailed correspondence with Sam Bowman,
Paul Christiano, Aidan Gomez, Dan Hendrycks, Jacob Hilton, Evan Hubinger, Andrew Ilyas, Percy Liang, Tom Lieberum,
Chris Maddison, Aleksander Madry, Ethan Perez, Jacob Steinhardt, and Martin Wattenberg.
We're especially indebted to Adam Scherlis and Tom Lieberum who replicated our results and wrote comments to be
included with this paper.
We're also deeply grateful to Daniela Amodei, Stanislav Fořt, Tristan Hume, Saurav Kadavath, Jamie Kerr, Shauna Kravec,
Jeffrey Ladish, Jia Yuan Loke, Liane Lovitt, Rebecca Raible, Sheer El Showk, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Matt OʼBrien, Kate
Rudolph, Jemima Jones, Geoffrey Irving, Tom McGrath, Michela Paganini, Allan Dafoe, Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata,
Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter, Katherine Lee, Beth Barnes, Jan Leike, Nate Thomas, Buck Shlegeris, Alex Tamkin, Quinn
Tucker, and Rob Harries; for their support, for comments on this work, and for conversations that contributed to the
background thinking on interpretability and safety this work is based on.
Author contributions
Research: The bulk of this line of work, including many iterations of experiments that didnʼt make it into the final paper,
was conducted by Catherine Olsson with mentorship from Chris Olah. Chris first discovered the “induction bump” in a 2-
layer model. He had the idea of investigating what aspects of the per-token loss changed most over the bump, and made
the connection to in-context learning. Catherine led data collection and analysis throughout the project. Data collection
made extensive use of Garcon infrastructure by Nelson Elhage. Nelson collected data and ran analyses for the smeared
key models. Chris Olah, Neel Nanda, and Catherine Olsson wrote the head activation evaluators. Research ideas were
significantly influenced and improved by others at Anthropic.


===== PAGE 54 =====
Writing: This article was drafted by Catherine Olsson, Chris Olah, and Nelson Elhage, with contributions and editing from
Neel Nanda and Dario Amodei. Dario Amodei originally suggested the “arguments” structure. The specific arguments
were iteratively refined in collaborative conversations between Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Catherine Olsson, and Nelson
Elhage. Nick Joseph contributed significant editing. Other members of Anthropic made miscellaneous contributions
throughout the writing process.
Figures and visualizations: Catherine Olsson generated the graphs in the model analysis table, and did preliminary
design and styling. Chris Olah finalized the design and styling, and created “pull-out” versions for smaller figures earlier
in the paper. Nelson Elhage contributed to the graphs of per-token losses on Harry Potter. Chris discovered the heads
showcased in Claim 2 and designed the “month-animal-color-fruit” task. Nelson set up the interactive visualizations,
using existing visualization tools built by Chris, with contributions from Nelson and Catherine, using PySvelte (see
github).
Model training: Nelson Elhage created the attention-only models and the smeared-key models. Dario Amodei collected
data for models trained on the alternate books-only dataset. All our interpretability research is enabled by having access
to models to study, including large models. Led by Tom Brown, Sam McCandlish, and Jared Kaplan, the majority of
Anthropic's technical staff contributed to the development of our efficient distributed training infrastructure and the
underlying machine learning. Core contributors include Nicholas Joseph, Tom Henighan, and Ben Mann. Nelson Elhage,
Kamal Ndousse, Andy Jones, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, and Danny Hernandez also contributed to this infrastructure.
Cluster: Tom Henighan and Nova DasSarma, advised by Tom Brown and Sam McCandlish with contributions from many
others at Anthropic, managed the research cluster our research depended on and maintained its stability. Nova provided
important support when interpretability required unorthodox jobs to run on our cluster.
Citation Information
Please cite as:
Olsson, et al., "In-context Learning and Induction Heads", Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
BibTeX Citation:
@article{olsson2022context,    title={In-context Learning and Induction Heads},    author={Olsson, Catherine and Elhage, Nelson and Nanda, Neel and Joseph, Nicholas and DasSarma, Nova and Henighan, Tom and Mann, Ben and Askell, Amanda and Bai, Yuntao and Chen, Anna and Conerly, Tom and Drain, Dawn and Ganguli, Deep and Hatfield-Dodds, Zac and Hernandez, Danny and Johnston, Scott and Jones, Andy and Kernion, Jackson and Lovitt, Liane and Ndousse, Kamal and Amodei, Dario and Brown, Tom and Clark, Jack and Kaplan, Jared and McCandlish, Sam and Olah, Chris},    year={2022},    journal={Transformer Circuits Thread},    note={https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html} } 
Where induction heads form
In this section we examine: Where are induction heads located in models? Do they generally form in the second layer, or
the last layer, or somewhere else?
Small attention-only models
In our attention-only models, induction heads form in the last layer.
(In these plots, each point represents a head, colored by layer and arranged along the x-axis by depth in the model. The
height of the point is the prefix matching score of that head.)


===== PAGE 55 =====
Small models with MLPs:
In small models with MLPs, by the 5L and 6L size, the induction heads form more in the second-to-last layer.
Full-sc a le  m od e ls:
In th e  m od e ls in our full-sc a le  sw e e p, ind uc tion h e a d s form  e a rlie r. In fa c t, in 24L a nd  40L m od e ls th e  m a jority of
ind uc tion h e a d s form  b e fore  th e  h a lfw a y p oint in m od e l d e p th.
Note that in these plots, only a randomized sample of 100 heads (with selection biased towards those scoring highly on
prefix matching) are shown as opaque dots; most of the datapoints are left translucent for ease of reading.


===== PAGE 56 =====
Distribution of scores
What is the distribution of headsʼ scores on our head activation evaluators?
The distribution is sharper in our small models than our full-size models. In both cases, heads with a positive prefix
matching score are more likely to have a positive copying score, and this correlation is even stronger for the highest
prefix matching scores.
(For models with more than 100 heads, a subset of heads is plotted, as seen in the opaque versus translucent datapoints
immediately above.)
Validating head activation evaluators
We show here that our head activation evaluators (that we use to measure the properties in our definition of induction
heads) correlate well with mathematically-based measures in small attention-only models.
Copying
Our copying evaluator correlates well with the OV matrix of each head. Specifically here we plot against the sum of the
eigenvalues, divided by the absolute value of the eigenvalues, which is a measure of what fraction of the eigenvalues are
positive vs. negative.


===== PAGE 57 =====
Prefix matching
Our prefix matching evaluator correlates well with the trace of QK eigenvalues for the previous-token QK-circuit term.
Data Collection
We measure several properties of the modelʼs overall behavior and of each constituent attention head. With the
exception of the attention head ablations (which are the most computationally-intensive, and so were run only on the
small models), we measure these properties on all snapshots of all models across training (that is, 200 snapshots each
for the twelve small models, and 14 or 15 snapshots each for the six full-scale models). By measuring them on each
snapshot, we can see how each property evolves over the course of training, rather than simply measuring the final
model.


===== PAGE 58 =====
The properties we collect data on are as follows:
 . Per-token losses with unaltered models
 . Per-token losses with ablations of individual attention heads
 . Empirical head measurements with head activation evaluators: using heuristics to score attention heads
based on their observed activations, as another way of estimating “copying”, “prefix matching” and “previous
token” attention.
 . Mathematical head measurements with the trace of QK eigenvalues for the previous-token QK-circuit term:
measuring how much the WQWK weight matrix reads in a subspace affected by heads that attend to the previous
token.
(1) Per-token losses (unaltered models)
The most straightforward property we measure is per-token losses from each model snapshot. We run the model
snapshot on a set of 10,000 randomly-selected examples from the dataset, each of which is 512 tokens in length, and
save individual token losses for every token. The set is held the same between all snapshots and between all models in all
three families.
When analyzing the per-token loss data, we summarize it in two different ways:
Random token per example. For each example, we extract the loss for just one random token out of the 512
tokens and discard the rest, giving a length-10,000 vector for each model snapshot. (The random index used for
each example is consistent between each model.)
Context index average. We average the per-token losses by context index (i.e. by position), giving a length-512
vector for each model snapshot. The icontextth entry in the vector is an average over the 10,000 tokens drawn
from position icontextin each example.
(2) Per-token losses (attention head ablations)
One way to study individual attention heads is to measure the difference between the complete modelʼs overall behavior
and the overall behavior of a model that is exactly the same except for missing that head. We do this by successively
ablating (i.e. zeroing-out) each attention headʼs contribution to the residual stream. The approach of removing a headʼs
contribution can be thought of as loosely similar to a genetic “knockout” experiment in biology, where observing the
effect of removing a specific gene can provide information about the geneʼs function.
We could do these ablations in two different ways: a “full” ablation, and a “pattern-preserving” ablation. (The model
analysis table shows only pattern-preserving ablations; we explain the other method for comparison) The full ablation
would remove all of a headʼs contributions to model behavior, whereas the pattern-preserving ablation removes the
ablated headʼs contribution to all later headsʼ outputvectors, but preserves the ablated headʼs contribution to all later
headsʼ attention patterns.29
Full ablation
Method: Run the model, replacing the ablated attention headʼs result vector with a zero vector.
Outcome: All downstream computations are impacted (including all Q, K, and V calculations, and attention
patterns).
Pattern-preserving ablation (shown in Model Analysis Table)
Method:
Step 1: Run the model for the first time, saving all attention patterns and discarding the output logits.
Step 2: Run model a second time. Replace the ablated attention headʼs result vector with a zero vector,
and force all attention patterns to be the version recorded in the first run.
Outcome: Only downstream V calculations are affected by the ablation, not Q and K calculations. The
contribution a head makes to later layersʼ attention patterns is preserved.30


===== PAGE 59 =====
This is by far the most computationally-intensive measurement we perform, although fortunately it consists of many
small single-GPU jobs and so we could often run it in “spare” capacity.
As a quick note of comparison, our previous work in Transformer Circuits also contained ablation experiments. Although
there are similarities (most notably the decision to freeze patterns), the specific ablations we describe here are
individual attention headablationswhere only one attention head is modified at a time, whereas the ablations
described in our prior work are nth-order termablationsin which all attention heads are manipulated at once and the
process is repeated iteratively n times.
(3) Head activation evaluators
We construct three heuristic measurements of attention heads, to score how strongly a head exhibits specific properties
of interest. These are empirical measurements, based on observed activations on example data.
We evaluate heads on the following properties:
Copying. Does the headʼs direct effect on the residual stream increase the logits   of the same token as the one
being attended to?
Prefix matching. On repeated sequences of random tokens, does the head attend to earlier tokens that are
followed by a token that matches the present token?
Previous token attention. Does the head attend to the token that immediately precedes the present token?
(Note that “copying” is a property that depends on a headʼs OV circuit, whereas “prefix matching” and “previous token
attention” are properties that depend on a headʼs QK circuit.)
We are interested in these properties in particular — copying, prefix matching, and previous token attention — because
they are relevant to induction headsʼ function of predicting repeated sequences of random tokens. Specifically, (1) a
head with both a “copying” OV circuit and a “prefix matching” QK circuit is thereby an induction head by our definition,
because it attends to previous instances of the present token and increases the logit of the token that followed; and (2) a
“previous token” head can be used as an algorithmic component of a future induction head in a later layer (as we explain
in more detail in Argument 5).
In more detail, each head evaluator is implemented as follows, and each score is averaged over 10 examples.
Copying: Generate a sequence of 25 random tokens, excluding the most common and the least common tokens.
Compute this headʼs contribution to the residual stream, then convert that using the unembeddings (i.e. along
the “direct path”) to impacts on each logit. Logits are transformed by subtracting the mean of the logits and
passing through a ReLU, allowing the evaluator to focus on where logits are raised. Compute the ratio of the
amount it raises the logits of the token being attended to, to that of all tokens in this sample. This value ranges
from 0 (only raises other tokens) to 0.5 (only raises the present token), so we scale it into the range of -1 to 1.
Prefix matching: Generate a sequence of 25 random tokens, excluding the most common and the least common
tokens. Repeat this sequence 4 times and prepend a “start of sequence” token.Compute the attention pattern.
The prefix matching score is the average of all attention pattern entries attending from a given token back to the
tokens that preceded the same token in earlier repeats.
Previous token: Draw an example from the training distribution. Compute the attention pattern. The previous
token score is the average of the entries of all the attention pattern entries attending from token i to token i-1.
31
In the Appendix we validate the connection between these empirical measurements and the mathematical properties of
attention head weight matrices explored in Transformer Circuits, and show a joint distribution of scores for copying and
prefix matching, for heads in the small and large models.
(4) Trace of QK eigenvalues (for previous-token QK-circuit term)
In addition to the heuristic measurements described above, we construct another measure of prefix matching that
draws on concepts from   A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits. In short, we measure how overall large and
positive the eigenvalues are of the  matrix found in the term of the QK circuit that corresponds specifically to “pure K-
composition” with heads that attend to the previous token. Positive eigenvalues of  indicate “same-matching”:
preferring that this component of the query and key vectors be the same. A “same-matching”  matrix associated with
a “previous token” term in the QK circuit is a simple way to implement basic prefix matching behavior. We unpack here
more about what this measure is and how it is computed.
W W W


===== PAGE 60 =====
The “QK circuit” is a term we coined in our previous work to refer specifically to the entire transformation  which is
applied to the one-hot token vectors  to compute the attention pattern  for a specific head: 
. The full computation of  for a given head can be decomposed into many terms, each
corresponding to one of the many paths through the model that needs to be computed in order to map tokens to their
attention scores for that head. The section Path Expansion of Attention Scores QK Circuit in our earlier work shows all the
terms of a full expansion for a two-layer model; models with more layers have QK circuits with even more terms.
C  
QKh
t Ah A h
= softmax t ⋅C  t∗(T QKh ) C  
QKh
For this measure, we narrow the scope of our calculation to the simplest possible term of the QK circuit that could
contribute to the “prefix-matching” behavior of an induction head: namely, only pure K-composition terms (in which the
query-side term is just the direct path from the embeddings), and furthermore only the subset of those that correspond
specifically to K-composing with an earlier head that consistently attends to the immediately previous token.
In order to compute this measure for a given head, we do the following:
 . For all attention heads in earlier layers, measure how “previous-token-like” the head is, as the average of the
attention pattern along the previous-token off-diagonal, over an example text.
 . Compute the  matrix found in each individual  term, for each head in earlier
layers.
 . Create a combined  matrix by weighting the matrices in step 2 by the measurement in step 1 of how “previous-
token-like” each previous head is.
 . Measure the trace (i.e. the sum of the eigenvalues) of this combined weighted  matrix.
W Id⊗A ⊗W W  W  W 
h 
k ET QKh OVh 
k E
W
W
Because this measure relies on K-composition with heads in previous layers, it is only defined for models more than one
layer deep, and only for attention heads in the second layer and beyond.
We show in the Appendix that this measure correlates well with our heuristic prefix matching evaluator on our small
models.
Analyses
Per-token losses
The second through fourth rows of the Model Analysis Table show results derived from the per-token losses from the
small models and full-scale models. We show the following “views” on the per-token loss data:
Loss curve: The random-token-per-exampleloss data— a matrix of size (N model snapshots x 10,000
examples) for N = 200 snapshots per small model and N = 15 snapshots per full-scale model — is averaged over
the example dimension, giving an average loss per model snapshot. 
2D in-context learning plot: The context-index-average loss data — a matrix of size (N model snapshots x 512
token index positions) — is visualized directly as a 2D plot. This shows model performance on tokens earlier
versus later in the context, as well as across training time. We borrow this technique for highlighting “in-context
learning” from Kaplan et al.. A horizontal slice of this plot represents a loss curve as a function of training
step, for one particular token index rather than averaged over all tokens; a vertical slice represents a particular
snapshotʼs prediction ability as a function of token index.
2D loss derivative plot: We also plot the partial derivative of the context-index-average loss data with respect to
log(context index). This captures the amount that token loss is reduced by seeing ϵ % more context. 
In-context learning score: We compute what we call the “in-context learning score” as the average loss of the
500th token minus the average loss of the 50th token (for a length-512 context)± over training. This functions as
a summary of the 2D in-context learning plot, capturing in a single summary statistic the trajectory over training
time of the modelʼs ability to make better predictions later in the context than earlier.
[13]


===== PAGE 61 =====
Additionally in a separate row at the top, we show PCA results from the per-token results. These are displayed separately
because, unlike all the other graphs, the x-axis is not elapsed training tokens.
PCA: A plot of each model's trajectory in function space over training time, using PCA. The random-token-per-
example loss data for all snapshots and all models of each type is concatenated into a large matrix, of shape
(N*M model snapshots x 10,000 examples), where N = 200 snapshots per model and M = 12 models for small
models, and N = 15 snapshots per model and M = 6 models for full-scale models. This combined matrix is
projected down to the first two principal components. Each model is then plotted separately, tracing out a
trajectory in function space over the course of its training
Attention head measurements
The next two rows of Figure 1 show results derived from the attention head measurements: one row shows the score of
the “prefix matching” head activation evaluator over training time, and the following row shows the prefix-matching QK-
circuit eigenvalue trace over training time.
For the small models, all attention heads are shown. For the full-scale models, a subset of 100 heads is shown; see the
Appendix for an explanation of how the 100 heads were chosen.
Note that in the QK-circuit plot, the change in weight decay at approximately 5 billion tokens (described in Model Details)
can be seen particularly prominently as a bend or hiccup in the plotted trajectories, but occurs after the phase change
and is an unrelated phenomenon.
Ablation attribution to phase change
For the small models only, the final two rows of Figure 1 show results derived from the per-token loss data from the
attention head ablation experiments. We show only the pattern-preserving ablation results here; full ablation results can
be found in the appendix. Note also that ablation experiments were not conducted for the full-scale models.
The first “view” on the ablation data is the attribution to the “before-and-after” vector, which relates the result of each
head ablation to the change in model behavior over the course of the phase change, and which we explain here. First: For
a given model, a length-10,000 vector is computed by taking the delta of the random-token-per-example loss data for
the “phase change end” snapshot, minus the “phase change start” snapshot. This represents how the modelʼs behavior
changed over the course of the phase change. This vector is normalized to a unit vector; we call this the before-and-
after vector. It can be thought of as the “direction in token-loss space” that is affected by the phase change. Second:
Note that ablating a given head also induces a change in the behavior of a model snapshot, and thus a corresponding
length-10,000 vector change to the random-token-per-example loss data (calculated by subtracting the un-ablated
snapshotʼs per-token loss vector from the ablated snapshotʼs per-token loss vector). We are interested in the similarity
between these two changes, which we compute as the dot product between the modelʼs before-and-after vector and the
ablation change vector for this head and this snapshot. For induction heads, this dot product is negative, indicating that
removing induction heads is like undoing the changes to model behavior that happened during the phase change.
The second “view” on the ablation data is the attribution to the in-context learning score. We operationalize the modelʼs
in-context learning abilities as how much better the model is at predicting the 500th token than the 50th token: this
difference measured as Loss(ntrain, icontext= 500) - Loss(ntrain, icontext= 50) is the in-context learning score.