

===== PAGE 1 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Anna Rogers * 1 Alexandra Sasha Luccioni * 2
Abstract
Much of the recent discourse within the ML com-
munity has been centered around Large Language
Models (LLMs), their functionality and poten-
tial — yet not only do we not have a working
definition of LLMs, but much of this discourse
relies on claims and assumptions that are worth re-
examining. We contribute a definition of LLMs,
critically examine five common claims regarding
their properties (including ‘emergent properties’),
and conclude with suggestions for future research
directions and their framing.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have become ubiquitous
in the Machine Learning (ML) research landscape, and they
already impact the lives of thousands of people in contexts
ranging from health (Graber-Stiehl, 2023; Harrer, 2023)
to education (Kasneci et al., 2023). Yet despite the many
research articles on LLMs, their very definition remains
unclear, and much of this work is based on claims that are
often stated, but remain debatable in terms of their framing,
theoretical grounding, or empirical evidence. When we, as
researchers, repeat such claims uncritically, we contribute to
the narratives shaped by business interests (McKelvey et al.,
2023), and may mislead the public and ourselves.
This position paper argues that LLM research should
be more precise with its key terms and claims . To that
end, we propose a definition for the term “LLM” (§2), and
we critically examine five common claims about LLM func-
tionality, drawing heavily on both empirical studies and
socio-technical critiques of LLMs (§3). We then consider
the impact that these claims have on ML research (§4). We
conclude with concrete proposals for maintaining rigor and
diversity in ML research and practice (§5).
*Equal contribution 1IT University of Copenhagen 2Hugging
Face, Canada. Correspondence to: Anna Rogers <arog@itu.dk>,
Sasha Luccioni <sasha.luccioni@hf.co>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
2. What Counts as an Large Language Model?
The common technical definition of “language models” is
“models that assign probabilities to upcoming words, or se-
quences of words in general” (Jurafsky & Martin, 2024,
p.32). Yet the term “large language models” is currently
used in quite a different way, both within the research com-
munity (e.g. in the call for papers of academic conferences
such as EMNLP (2023)), in news articles (Roose, 2023),
and even by legislators at U.S. Senate hearings (Zakrzewski,
2023)). Despite its ubiquity, this definition is far from clear.
For instance, how many parameters should a neural network
have to qualify as an LLM? And do only Transformer-type
architectures qualify? What about multimodal models, such
as text-to-image or image-to-text?
Given the many subfields and contexts in which this term is
already used, it is not feasible to impose a single definition
and expect everybody to adhere to it. But even if there is no
agreement, both academic and general public discussions
would be more productive if the authors of research papers
spelled out or cited their own working definitions. What fol-
lows is our own attempt, which we hope could be useful to
others (either for using our version, or as a base to be modi-
fied by other researchers to reflect their own understanding
of this term). It relies upon three definitional criteria:
(1) LLMs model text1 and can be used to generate2 it
based on input context, i.e. by selecting the tokens that
are the most likely given the partial context provided
as input (either masked3 or as a prompt). The text can
be in any modality — characters, pixels, audio, etc.
(2) LLMs receive large-scale pretraining, where ‘large-
1We understand ‘text’ as ‘a unit of language in use’ (Halliday
& Hasan, 2013), the product of using that language. We see this
as a more accurate description, because LLMs model the corpora
they are trained on, rather than language in general (Veres, 2022).
2Most current LLMs produce text in some way, and so our
definition focuses on these. To extend it to energy-based models
or discriminative models like ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), we
could say ‘can be used to generate or score text’.
3While BERT-style (Devlin et al., 2019) encoders could be
used to generate text, it is admittedly a tortuous way of doing
so, compared to autoregressive models. However, in both cases
we fundamentally solve a classification problem over the model’s
vocabulary, and autoregressive models could be viewed as a special
case of masked language models.
1


===== PAGE 2 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
scale’ refers to the pre-training data rather than the
number of parameters. The exact threshold for LLM-
qualifying volume of data is necessarily arbitrary, and
for an English corpus we propose setting it to 1B to-
kens4 (inspired by Chelba et al. (2013)).
(3) LLMs are used for transfer learning, on the assump-
tion that they encode information that can be lever-
aged in other tasks. Currently the most common trans-
fer learning methods with LLMs are fine-tuning, as
in BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and prompting, as in
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), but there are many other
methods (Pan & Yang, 2010; Ramponi & Plank, 2020;
Alyafeai et al., 2020; Zhuang et al., 2021).
According to the above criteria, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
and its derivatives do qualify as LLMs, as do models from
the GPT series (Radford et al., 2018). So do n-gram lan-
guage models, given that they are derived from a sufficiently
large corpus, such as Google Books (Lin et al., 2012). Ear-
lier word-level representations such as word2vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013) are ruled out on the first criterion, when they
are viewed by themselves, but their training is conceptually
very similar to a masked language model, and they can also
use large volumes of text (over 100B tokens for the original
word2vec). Modern LLMs can also be used standalone,
or for creating representations used in other systems (e.g.
BERT’s [CLS] token representation (Devlin et al., 2019) fed
into classifiers). On our criteria, such representations would
not be LLMs, but they are derived from LLMs.
Our first criterion does not rule out multimodal models like
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)), as long as they output text – even
if they also accept or output images or other modalities. The
“text” is typically human-written text in a natural language,
but it could also be synthetic data (e.g. text created with
templates from knowledge base data). The training data of
modern LLMs typically also includes text that is not natural
language data: code, ascii art, midi music, math notation,
chess transcripts etc. While such data can be learned via
token prediction, it is not the focus of our definition.
4The 1B threshold could need adjustment for different lan-
guages and tokenization schemes, if empirical evidence justifies it.
We propose to consider raw source data, without any augmentation
or considering multiple training runs. We are assuming that these
data points would be mostly unique, since it is common practice
to deduplicate training data.
When it comes to multimodal LLMs, the amount of textual in-
formation in multimodal data can still be approximated via token
count (e.g. in transcripts). The other information would be extralin-
guistic, and a unit for that is yet to be developed – but compute
or parameter counts do not do it justice either. Ideally we would
be able to semantically chunk the multimodal content at least as
crudely as tokens chunk text, and relate it to the text that it grounds.
E.g. we should be able to distinguish between a voiceover over
blank screen, a dialogue captured with a fixed camera, or the same
dialogue captured from various angles, based on who is speaking.
Our second criterion allows for the inclusion of models
such as tinyBERT (Jiao et al., 2020): it has only 4.4M
parameters, but its training dataset (via model distillation)
is the same as that of the full BERT model, which contains
3.3B tokens. Our choice of linking the “large” part of LLMs
to the volume of data rather model size also helps to deal
with another edge case: the models that were reduced in
size (e.g. via distillation, such as Sanh et al. (2019)) for the
sake of computational efficiency, but maintain comparable
performance to the original models.
Our third criterion applies to the “general-purpose” LLMs
that are purported to be domain-independent. But the core
criterion is transfer learning, which may also take place
within a specific domain. For example, SciBERT (Beltagy
et al., 2019) or Galactica (Taylor et al., 2022) are still LLMs,
even though they were primarily trained on scientific liter-
ature, because they are expected to be used flexibly for a
range of tasks within that domain.
At present, in most cases the three criteria listed above
correspond to Transformer-based models that are used to
generate text. But having a more concrete definition helps
to ground the scientific discourse, and provide a point of
reference for updating it in the future.
As we learn more about both LLMs and neural architec-
tures, our proposed threshold for “large” may change, e.g.
if there is empirical evidence or theoretical guarantees that
a certain volume of natural texts provides sufficient signal
for a defined set of linguistic “skills” for a given model
architecture. Hopefuly in the future we would also have
more proofs, theoretical rationales, or empirical evidence,
based on which the “large” part could be further qualified
by numerous factors relevant to the performance of the final
model: the diversity in the textual data (domains, languages,
registers etc.), benchmark contamination, acceptable levels
of data augmentation or explicit instruction in the form of
annotated data, ratio and role of non-linguistic data, du-
plicate and near-duplicate data points, allowed number of
model runs over the training data, etc.
LLMs vs “foundation” and “frontier models”. LLMs
are also sometimes referred to as “foundation models”, a
term proposed by Bommasani et al (2021) to refer to “any
model that is trained on broad data (generally using self-
supervision at scale) that can be adapted (e.g., fine-tuned) to
a wide range of downstream tasks”. This partly corresponds
to our criteria (2) and (3), but makes no attempt to quantify
their scale. It is also intentionally broader, so as to include
e.g. models for computer vision or protein data. The term
“LLM” is more specific, and useful in studies modeling
language data.
Another recently proposed term is “frontier models”, defined
as “highly capable foundation models that could exhibit suf-
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
ficiently dangerous capabilities” (Anderljung et al., 2023).
This relies on the above “foundation model” term, and only
adds the criterion of “sufficiently dangerous capabilities”,
which the authors acknowledge to be vague. Various kinds
of risks from LLMs are beyond the scope of this work, but
see §3.5 for a relevant discussion of “emergent properties”.
3. Fact-checking LLM Functionality
We discuss five common claims about LLMs: that LLMs are
robust (§3.1), that they systematically achieve state-of-the-
art results (§3.2), that their performance is predominantly
due to their scale (§3.3), that they are “general-purpose
technologies (§3.4) and that they exhibit emergent properties
(§3.5). We are not saying that all these claims are completely
false – but they all have many caveats, which are mentioned
much less frequently. By collecting existing evidence and
counter-arguments, we aim to highlight some of the gaps
and inconsistencies in our current knowledge and to help
orient future work so as to address these gaps.
3.1. Claim: LLMs are Robust
Early symbolic AI approaches are often described as “brit-
tle” because of their strict dependence on pre-formulated
knowledge and lack of robustness outside of the distribution
they were trained on. Lenat & Feigenbaum (1981, p.1175)
described this as “a plateau of competence, but the edges
of that plateau are steep descents into complete incompe-
tence”. With the advent of LLMs, the issue of robustness is
seen to be much less prominent. For instance, Bommasani
et al. (2021, p.109) state: “pretraining on unlabeled data is
an effective, general-purpose way to improve accuracy on
[out-of-distribution] test distributions”. LLMs are often pre-
sented as multi-task learners that are robust without explicit
supervision, even outside the distribution they were trained
on (Radford et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2019; 2020).
Indeed, we have overcome the problem of thesteep descents
into complete incompetence: unfamiliar inputs no longer
completely break the system. But deep-learning-based ML
systems are still fundamentally brittle, only in a different
way: according to Chollet (2019, p.3), they are “unable
to make sense of situations that deviate slightly from their
training data or the assumptions of their creators”. Chollet
goes even further, stating in an interview that there are no
fixes for this issue (Heaven et al., 2019). Impressive as
the latest LLMs are, they still make errors even in simple
tasks like adding numeric literals (Chang & Bergen, 2023).
Moreover, they are just as vulnerable to adversarial attacks
(Zou et al., 2023) as earlier models (Wallace et al., 2019).
One could argue that “robust” does not mean “perfect” – but
in that case, what does it mean? For an ML engineer, it is
something like “sufficiently useful in practice”. From that
point of view, two situations are possible: the model will be
deployed in the conditions either (a) guaranteed to be similar
to its training distribution in all aspects that matter for its
performance, or (b) expected to diverge from that. Our
current LLM-based solutions may be sufficiently robust
for in-distribution scenarios, but few would argue the
same for out-of-distribution cases. Case (b) covers many,
if not most, LLM application areas: text classifiers will
continually encounter new topics and domains, language
usage will evolve, the correct answers to factual questions
will change, discourse strategies for interaction with AI-
enabled chatbots will shift, people will adapt what they post
online and to the privacy and surveillance concerns, etc. And
failures of ML systems may have real-world consequences
for those who diverge the most from its core distribution:
e.g. people may be denied asylum due to errors of machine
translation systems, something that we have already seen
happen (Nalbandian, 2022).
One well-studied cause of brittleness in the LLMs of the
BERT generation was shortcut learning (McCoy et al., 2019;
Rogers et al., 2020; Branco et al., 2021; Choudhury et al.,
2022, inter alia) – models picking up undesirable spurious
correlations from the training data, which are very likely to
exist in all the larger datasets used by the data-hungry deep
learning systems (Gardner et al., 2021). This problem is still
there for the latest LLMs: when they fail on counterfactual
tasks or adversarial perturbations, this suggests that their
successes are due not to learning the general principles
behind a certain operation, but some narrow heuristic that
does not transfer to new contexts. (Wu et al., 2023).
In the few-shot evaluation paradigm, we also now have a
new robustness problem. The art of ‘prompt engineering’
(Liu et al., 2023c) arose out of the prompt sensitivity phe-
nomenon: slight variations in the phrasing of the prompt that
would not make much difference to a human can lead to very
different LLM output (Lu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021). In
a recent evaluation of 30 LLMs, Liang et al. (2022, p.12)
conclude that “all models show significant sensitivity to the
formatting of prompt, the particular choice of in-context
examples, and the number of in-context examples across all
scenarios and for all metrics”. The reports of sensitivity to
exact wording keep coming for the latest models, including
GPT-4 (Lee et al., 2023; Gan & Mori, 2023).
3.2. Claim: (Few-shot) LLMs Are State-of-the-Art
LLM-based approaches have become the default in the cur-
rent research literature, and are largely perceived to be the
current SOTA (state-of-the-art) across NLP benchmarks.
For example, Gillioz et al. (2020, p.179) state: “Models like
GPT and BERT relying on this Transformer architecture
have fully outperformed the previous state-of-the-art net-
works. It surpassed the earlier approaches by such a wide
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
margin that all the recent cutting edge models seem to rely
on these Transformer-based architectures.”
The above was written in the days of fine-tuned Transformer-
based LLMs like BERT. At this point, such a statement
needs to be considered in the context of the distinction
between few-shot performance (ostensibly out-of-domain
performance achieved by a model that was not specifically
trained on a given task), vs performance of a model fine-
tuned for a given task . For example, both BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) were presented
with evaluation on question answering, among other tasks,
but the former was fine-tuned, while the latter evaluated in
a few-shot way.
Generally speaking, an ML model that has been trained on
some domain data can be reasonably expected to perform
better in that domain than a comparable model that hasn’t
received such training. This means that we now have two
different notions of SOTA, where the few-shot setting could
reasonably be expected to yield worse performance vs the
same model if it was fine-tuned, but requires less data and
training. Still, the current research papers introducing LLMs
often include only few- or zero-shot evaluations, which cre-
ates the impression that this is the only evaluation that mat-
ters. For example, OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) was evaluated
on 16 tasks concurrently without fine-tuning, establishing
new accuracy in several of them; the same goes for models
such as PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), LLaMa (Touvron
et al., 2023a), and many others.
We broadly agree that pre-trained models based on Trans-
former architecture are likely to be the current SOTA when
they are provided additional in-domain supervision. But
most of the current LLM evaluation discourse shifted
to few- or zero-shot evaluation, and in that context the
SOTA claim may not hold. Hence, many of the current
results may not actually represent the current SOTA.
When we consider direct comparisons between few-shot
LLMs and supervised systems, not based on the same LLMs,
the winner depends on the specific case, but the few-shot
LLM is not at all guaranteed to win – especially in the “true
few-shot” setting, where prompts are not selected based on
extra held-out data (Perez et al., 2021). They may also be
at disadvantage in the niche domains or tasks like sequence
labeling that are less straightforward to formulate as a text
generation task. Consider that few-shot GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) is on the SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) leaderboard
with the average score of 71.8, compared to a score of 84.6
achieved by a fine-tuned RoBERTa model (Liu et al., 2019).
As another example, recent work on NER (Wang et al.,
2023) and relation extraction (Wan et al., 2023) explicitly
formulated their problem as few-shot learning generally
trailing behind supervised approaches in their tasks of in-
terest, and their contribution - as overcoming that (in both
cases, with the help of a supervised method in the pipeline).
OpenAI (2023) claimed that GPT-4 outperforms unspeci-
fied fine-tuned models on 6 out of 7 verbal reasoning tasks,
but provided no detail on model or benchmark selection,
making it impossible to reproduce or verify these results.
One more consideration for the “(few-shot) LLMs are SOTA”
statement is that it implies a direct competition with other
methods, with which a meaningful comparison is possible.
But what are we comparing – the model architectures or
training data? ML as a scientific field focuses on the for-
mer, but most LLM leaderboards present apple-to-orange
comparisons.
Finally, for both few-shot and fine-tuned evaluation of
LLMs, most of the reported results should be taken with
a grain of salt because of test data contamination . For
example, GPT-4 received a lot of press coverage due to the
claim of achieving a score that falls in the top 10% of test
takers on a simulated bar exam (Katz et al., 2023) – but that
result was soon questioned on grounds of improper evalua-
tion and possible data contamination (Martínez, 2023).
In the GPT-3 report, OpenAI itself documented how hard it
is to avoid benchmark contamination (Brown et al., 2020).
By now, multiple studies presented evidence of the pres-
ence of common NLP benchmarks in multiple datasets used
for training LLMs (Dodge et al., 2021; Magar & Schwartz,
2022; Blevins & Zettlemoyer, 2022), which can inflate LLM
performance in certain tasks and datasets. The LM Contami-
nation Index5, a collaborative effort to document benchmark
contamination, currently has 375 entries for various bench-
marks and models across different tasks. Furthermore, a
recent study has documented the effect where GPTs score
higher on the “old” benchmarks than on the new ones (Liu
et al., 2023a), which strongly suggests that the previously
reported evaluation results may be inflated.
3.3. Claim: (LLM) Scale Is All You Need
Scaling has played a central role in the success of LLMs –
starting with the ‘scaling laws’ paper for causal language
models (Kaplan et al., 2020), which found that their per-
formance improves with scaling the model size, data size,
and also the amount of compute used for training. This
analysis was subsequently expanded to other benchmarks,
modalities and downstream tasks (Ghorbani et al., 2021; Al-
abdulmohsin et al., 2022; Hernandez et al., 2021; Hoffmann
et al., 2022). It is often mentioned as a key factor6 in LLM
5https://hitz-zentroa.github.io/lm-
contamination/
6To be fair, the focus on scaling does not entail that other factors
are completely irrelevant, and we are not saying that the entire
ML community believes that “scale is all you need”. But it is also
fair to say that scaling has received a lot more attention than other
factors, in particular data, which has long been considered as a less
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
performance; for instance, Huang et al. (2023b, p.1) state:
“scaling has enabled Large Language Models (LLMs) to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on a range of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks”. The focus on scaling
is in line with the “bitter lesson” of Sutton (2019), which
states that we should stop working on methods based on
the human knowledge of the target problem, and embrace
“search and learning”, because “the only thing that matters
in the long run is the leveraging of computation”.
Indeed, the scaling hypothesis seems to be supported by
the fact that LLMs have been growing in size for several
years: e.g. BERT-base in 2018 had 340M parameters (De-
vlin et al., 2019), and in 2022 PaLM had 540B parameters in
2022 (Chowdhery et al., 2022). And there is evidence that,
even with the same architecture and training data, larger
models tend to perform better, even with adversarial eval-
uation (Bhargava et al., 2021; Ray Choudhury et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022b).
However, it is important to keep in mind that many of the
best-known LLMs scaled both the number of parameters
and their training data concurrently (besides any differences
in architecture and training set-up) 7. While this seems to
support the scaling laws hypothesis as formulated by Kaplan
et al. (2020)—we do not know which of these components is
most responsible for the improvement, and most LLMs are
not directly comparable by more than one of these criteria.
Furthermore, simply increasing the size of the training
dataset has a complex relation with its quality. When we
train LLMs on cleaner, more diverse text data, we do not
merely provide more data, but more knowledge (by better
covering the kinds of information that may be required for
performing the model’s task). Then,the improved perfor-
mance likely results from the fact that we are supplying
more knowledge, and not just more scale/computation,
and it is bounded by availability of such knowledge. Un-
like in chess and Go, for LLMs the new knowledge has to
come from manually created sources, which do not cover all
scenarios that may arise in practice, and hence computation
can only take us as far as the data goes. 8 In practice, we
break the central tenet of the “bitter lesson” all the time:
when we identify an area where a model under-performs,
a common solution is to try to collect, label, synthesize, or
prestigious kind of work (Sambasivan et al., 2021).
7E.g. BERT was trained on roughly 3.3 billion tokens, and
PaLM’s training data had 780 billion, representing a growth of
1500 times in terms of model size and 260 times in terms of dataset
size. This came with a big improvement in performance: BERT
achieved an accuracy of 70.1% on the RTE dataset, PaLM achieves
an accuracy of 95.7%, with possible data contamination.
8This is not to say that such a system cannot be useful in some
cases, or that it cannot exhibit some generalization within a space
sufficiently covered by data: the linguistic fluency of the current
LLMs is a testament to the possibility of learning “closed” systems
such as syntax.
even create more data for that problem, which is tantamount
to injecting manually-curated knowledge.
This would be in line with the fact that the developers of
high-performing LLMs now spend more effort on improv-
ing the quality of the training data. E.g. both PaLM re-
ports (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023) devote
considerable effort to data cleaning, with PaLM 2 explic-
itly attributing higher performance on English benchmarks
to higher quality data (Anil et al., 2023, p.9); the paper
accompanying the Chinchilla model also makes a similar
“quality over quantity” point with regards to data (Hoffmann
et al., 2022). The Llama 3 announcement9 stresses a heavy
investment in pre-training data. The key result of Phi model
(Gunasekar et al., 2023) is also explicitly presented as a
smaller high-performing model, made possible by training
on higher-quality data.
Furthermore, the last few years have seen an increased skep-
ticism around the scaling hypothesis, starting with ‘efficient
scaling’ proposals for Transformer models, which showed
that smaller, more efficient models can outperform bigger
ones in certain settings (Tay et al., 2021). This was further
explored in practice via the Inverse Scaling Prize, showing
that there are tasks, such as logical reasoning and pattern
matching, where the performance does not seem to improve
with model size (McKenzie et al., 2022).
Finally, let us consider the fact that there are high-
performing open-access models such as LLaMa series (Tou-
vron et al., 2023a;b), which perform very well despite being
much smaller than GPT-3. The success of techniques such
as knowledge distillation (Pan et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2019)
and sparsity (Srinivasan et al., 2023) also strongly suggests
at least that the model size by itself is not the ‘secret sauce’.
And, of course, it can be a deal-breaker for deploying mod-
els in production, irrespective of performance gains.
3.4. Claim: LLMs Are General-Purpose Technologies
According to Eloundou et al. (2023, p.3), Generative Pre-
trained Transformers (GPTs) are general-purpose tech-
nologies (GPTs). This framing can be found both in the
media (Kuttan, 2023; McKendrick, 2023) and preprints
(Tamkin et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023b).10
GPT (General-Purpose Technology) is a term used by
economists and historians to refer to technologies that are
both era-defining and pervasive over time; however, what
qualifies as a GPT and what does not has been hard to
delineate, since technologies are often nested within other
systems of recursive technologies and systems (Knell & Van-
nuccini, 2022). A widely-accepted definition by economists
9https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3/
10The preprints by Eloundou et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023b)
were co-authored by researchers affiliated with OpenAI.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Lipsey and Carlaw proposes 4 criteria for a technology to be
considered general-purpose: (1) it is a single, recognisable
generic technology, (2) it comes to be widely used across
the economy, (3) it has many different uses and (4) it creates
many spillover effects (Lipsey et al., 2005). According to
these criteria, a total of 24 technologies such as the wheel,
the printing press and electricity are considered GPTs.
At this point, it is hard to assert the general-purpose sta-
tus of LLMs by the above criteria. They are not a single,
generic technology (as discussed in §2). They are currently
not widely used in different domains (Bekar et al., 2018;
Prytkova, 2021), and remain auxiliary tools even in those do-
mains where they are most used (Bianchini et al., 2020). In
terms of it usage, LLMs are not widely used in the vast ma-
jority of economic activities, and they are reliant upon spe-
cific commodities such as large amounts of GPUs and highly
specialized labor, which are only available in a small number
of industries and by a handful of organizations (Bresnahan,
2019). A further constraint is the fact that LLMs, like all
deep learning-based technology, can be expected to work
best in-distribution – and it is unclear to what extent issues
with robustness (§3.1) will limit its broader utility in the
vast number of economic sectors associated with the smaller
communities and languages.
As for the final criterion, regarding the potential spillover
effects of these technologies, it is really too early to tell what
these may be (Bresnahan, 2019; Crafts, 2021; Natale & Bal-
latore, 2020). The overnight popularity of ChatGPT, which
is often seen as proof of the widespread usage of LLMs in
broader society, can mainly be attributed to the creation of a
simple user interface on top of models that had been previ-
ously available via APIs (Eloundou et al., 2023), rather than
technological novelty. Until we can meaningfully assess
the adoption and application of LLMs, we should refrain
from putting them in the same conceptual category as
the printing press, and focus on defining what they can and
cannot be used for (and under what conditions).
3.5. Claim: LLMs Exhibit “Emergent Properties”
LLMs are often discussed in terms of their “emergent prop-
erties”.11 Among such properties, various researchers have
included few-shot learning (Bommasani et al., 2021), “aug-
11Some researchers discuss “emergent abilities” rather than
“properties”. Both of these terms could also use better definitions.
Our interpretation is that they are used interchangeably in LLM re-
search, and the chief difference is the anthropomorphizing framing
for “ability”. The underlying construct in case of Wei et al. (2022a)
seems to be NLP “tasks”, on the assumptions that these tasks have
construct validity, and specific evaluation datasets provide valid
measurements of performance on these tasks. The task/benchmark
confusion is exacerbated by the fact that in BIG-Bench (Srivastava
et al., 2023) the constituent datasets are sometimes named as if
they were tasks (e.g. “IPA transliterate”).
mented prompting” techniques such as “chain of thought”
(Wei et al., 2022b), predicting intermediate computation
results (Nye et al., 2021) or whether the answer is correct
(Kadavath et al., 2022), and, on the input side – instruction
following (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021).
In line with the confusion about the term “LLM” (§2), the
term “emergent properties” seems to be used in at least 4
distinct ways in current LLM research:
Definition 3.1. A property that a model exhibits despite not
being explicitly trained for it. E.g. Bommasani et al. (2021,
p.5) refers to few-shot performance of GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) as “an emergent property that was neither specifically
trained for nor anticipated to arise”.
Definition 3.2. (Opposite to Definition 3.1): a property that
the model learned from the pre-training data. E.g. Desh-
pande et al. (2023, p.8) discuss emergence as evidence of
“the advantages of pre-training”.
Definition 3.3. A property “is emergent if it is not present
in smaller models but is present in larger models.” (Wei
et al., 2022a, p.2).
Definition 3.4. A version of Definition 3.3, where what
makes emergent properties “intriguing” is “their sharpness,
transitioning seemingly instantaneously from not present to
present, and their unpredictability, appearing at seemingly
unforeseeable model scales” (Schaeffer et al., 2023, p.1)
Definition 3.2 seems describe the expected outcome of suc-
cessful training. In this sense, “emergent properties” could
be referred to simply as “learned properties”.
Definition 3.3 is questionable if the “emergent” behavior can
be achieved in smaller models 12. Even more importantly,
we still have the contamination problem: if both the bigger
and smaller models were trained on data similar to the test
data, the bigger one would still be reasonably expected to
perform better just because it has more capacity to learn it.
In that case, Definition 3.3 follows from the Definition 3.2.
With respect to Definition 3.4, Schaeffer et al. (2023) make
a convincing case that such sharp increases in performance
may be an artifact of the chosen evaluation metric13 rather
than a fundamental property of scaling the model.
12See e.g. Schick & Schütze (2021); Gao et al. (2021). One
could object that these studies provide the smaller models a lot
of extra help (reformatting the inputs, selecting extra models etc.)
This is true, but the commonly reported few-shot performance
is also not really few-shot, and reliably choosing good prompts
becomes harder with larger models (presumably due to more
complex decision boundaries) (Perez et al., 2021).
13Wei (2023) and Anderljung et al. (2023, p.38) argue that this
is not important, because “non-smooth” metrics used for real tasks
are the ones we care about. But then the question remains whether
this is something special about LLMs, or just a property of the met-
ric. Simple models also have such “emergent properties”, as shown
by Schaeffer et al. (2023) for a shallow nonlinear autoencoder.
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
An even bigger issue with Definition 3.4 is that we simply
do not have enough data points to say that the increase in
performance is sharp: e.g. if we had intermediate model
sizes between the commonly-used 13B, 70B, and 150+B, we
would likely see a smooth transition. Wei (2023) acknowl-
edges that, but argues that the “emergence” phenomenon is
still interesting if there are large differences in predictability:
for some problems, performance of large models can easily
be extrapolated from performance of models 1000x less in
size, whereas for others, even it cannot be extrapolated even
from 2x less size. But the cited predictability at 1,000x less
compute refers to the GPT-4 report (OpenAI, 2023), where
the developers knew the target evaluation in advance, and
specifically optimized for “predictable scaling”. This is in
contrast with the unpredictability at 2x less compute for
unplanned BIG-Bench evaluation by Wei et al. (2022a).
So, we are left with Definition 3.1, which can be interpreted
in two ways:
Definition 3.5. A property is emergent if the model was not
exposed to training data for that property.
Definition 3.6. A property is emergent even if the model
was explicitly trained for it – as long as the developers were
unaware of it.
Per Definition 3.6, it would appear that we are training
LLMs as a very expensive method to discover what data
exists on the Web. For example, the fact that ChatGPT
can generate chess moves that are plausible-looking (but
often illegal)14 is to be expected, given the vast amount of
publicly-available chess transcripts on the Web.
Per Definition 3.5, we can prove that some property is emer-
gent only by showing that there was no evidence that could
have been the basis for the model outputs in the training
data. For commercial models with undisclosed data such
as ChatGPT, this is out of the question. But we would go
further and argue that the emergent properties according to
Definition 3.5 are only a hypothesis (if not wishful thinking)
even for the “open” LLMs, because so far we are lacking
detailed studies (or even a methodology) to consider the
exact relation between the amount and kinds of evidence in
the training text data for a particular model output. Hence,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no evidence for the
existence of “emergent properties” per Definition 3.5 .
Until we have such evidence, it seems strange for the ML
community to conclude that the best explanation for high
performance is not-learned-from-data emergent properties—
especially in the face of evidence to the contrary.15
14https://reddit.com/r/AnarchyChess/comments/10ydnbb/
i_placed_stockfish_white_against_chatgpt_black/
15E.g. Liang et al. (2022, p.12), evaluate 30 LLMs and conclude
that “regurgitation (of copyrighted materials) risk clearly correlates
with model accuracy”. Liu et al. (2023a) report that ChatGPT
and GPT-4 perform better on older compared to newly released
What about benchmarks that are newly created and tested
on for the first time in a given study – aren’t they, by defi-
nition, uncontaminated? We argue not: in the absence of a
methodology to even compare test and training data beyond
trivial exact matches, “new” tests may be so similar to some-
thing observed that they do not really count as “new”. This
has been a known problem even with benchmark datasets,
the size of which is very small compared to LLM training
data16. The LLM training data may also include something
that is not even public17 on the internet, and thus not easily
searchable to confirm the contamination.
Perhaps the most striking example of how unreliable the
“new” test examples are is the “sparks of intelligence” study
(Bubeck et al., 2023). Using the methodology of newly
constructed test cases, checked against public web data, and
their perturbations, Bubeck et al. (2023) notably concluded
that GPT-4 possesses “a very advanced theory of mind”. At
least two studies have since come to the opposite conclusion
(Sap et al., 2023; Shapira et al., 2023).
The above discussion focused on the way the term “emer-
gence” is currently used in LLM research. In philosophy of
science, there are many nuanced discussions of emergence
to which we cannot do justice here, but broadly it can be
characterized as a phenomenon in complex systems that is
dependent on its constituent parts, but is also distinct from
them. The leading example in Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy is a tornado: it consists of dust and debris, but it
“its features and behaviors appear to differ in kind from those
of its most basic constituents”(O’Connor & Wong, 2020).
Emergent phenomena are described by a different scientific
field, on a different level than the constituent phenomena: it
is possible to understand the behavior of tornadoes without
understanding particle physics. Does this notion of emer-
gence apply in the context of ML?
Our take is that such a notion of emergence would hold for
LLMs: the information they encode is not explainable by the
model weights, at least at the current state of interpretability
research. However, this also applies to most deep learning
models (e.g. a simple MLP for sentiment classification),
and the latest LLMs are not something special.
benchmarks, and McCoy et al. (2023) show that their performance
depends on probabilities of output word sequences in web texts.
Lu et al. (2023) show that “emergent abilities” of 18 LLMs can
be ascribed mostly to in-context learning. For in-context learning
itself, the results of Chan et al. (2022) suggest that it happens only
in Transformers trained on sequences, structurally similar to the
sequences in which in-context learning would be tested.
16E.g. Lewis et al. (2021) found that about 30% of test samples
in 3 popular QA benchmarks have near-duplicates in train data.
17In particular, the OpenAI models could have been trained not
only on Web data, but also on the data of thousands of researchers
who over the past year submitted their trickiest test cases to GPT-3
API (the policy for the API data to be opted out of training by
default only changed in Spring 2023).
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
4. How Does This Change the Theory and
Practice of ML?
The success of LLMs brought our field an increase in fund-
ing, real-world applications, and attention. But the percep-
tion of their robustness (§3.1) and SOTA status (§3.2), the
idea that their success is purely due to scale (§3.3), that
they are a general-purpose technology (§3.4), and their ill-
defined “emergent properties” (§3.5) also contribute to the
following trends:
• Homogeneity of approaches. If LLMs are so great, why
would we pursue anything else? It is understandable
that most current NLP research is focused on LLMs,
but this also means that as researchers we have most
of our eggs in one basket, and become less likely to
develop alternatives or see the gaps in our knowledge.
• De-democratization. Knight (2023) estimates that
training GPT-4 cost more than $100 million; although
the true number is unknown, the increase in computa-
tional requirements of LLMs is clear (Thompson et al.,
2022). This means that graduate students, independent
researchers, and even most academic labs struggle to
either reproduce existing results or train new LLMs
that would require large amounts of compute.
• Industry influence. Recent research into the affilia-
tions of researchers in ML (Abdalla & Abdalla, 2021;
Ahmed & Wahed, 2020; Birhane et al., 2022; Whit-
taker, 2021) has shown both a steep increase in indus-
try presence in conference publications over the past
years (e.g. a 180% growth for NLP (Abdalla et al.,
2023)), and an influence over the topics of research
being pursued by the community, such as robustness
and similar challenges, instead of more theory-oriented
topics. Given the above point, this trend makes sense,
since only industry labs with extensive funding can af-
ford to train and deploy LLMs. But it has implications
for the diversity of ideas and approaches in the field.
• (Further) decreased reproducibility. Reproducibility
was an issue in ML even before LLMs (Crane, 2018;
Cohen et al., 2018; Bouthillier et al., 2019), and it has
not gotten much better (Belz et al., 2021; 2022; Belz,
2022). LLMs pose additional issues both in reproduc-
ing their training and fine-tuning (Sellam et al., 2021;
McCoy et al., 2020) and inference results (Hagmann
et al., 2023), not to mention the lack of control over
API-only models that can change over time (Chen et al.,
2023; Rogers, 2023). If the tested model is deprecated,
or changes in any way (e.g. by extra training or fine-
tuning, changes in its associated parameters, filtering
mechanisms or system prompts), the results reported in
the study will no longer be reproducible. They might
not even hold at the time of publication – and we will
have no idea why.
The ideas that LLMs are robust (§3.1) and exhibit emer-
gent properties (§3.5) further contribute to the impression
of irrelevance of any theory of the linguistic, social, cog-
nitive, or any other phenomena that LLMs are supposed
to model. This is unsatisfactory if the goal is scientific re-
search, but even from a purely engineering perspective this
stance is dangerous, since it entails that we either cannot or
do not need to provide specifications for cases where a given
model is safe or unsafe to use. As a result, LLMs may be
deployed in society at large, without compelling evidence
of their performance in all the target scenarios, or among
the demographic groups that are likely underrepresented in
the training data (Bender et al., 2021), or across the less-
resourced languages (Zhu et al., 2023; Bang et al., 2023;
Lai et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a; Ziems et al., 2023).
5. Ways Forward
We have argued that there are many deep knowledge gaps in
LLM research, and the field is changing in ways that make
these gaps less likely to be addressed. We now conclude
with some concrete recommendations for future work.
Maintaining diversity of research approaches. We advocate
not for stopping all work on LLMs, but for maintaining a
healthy diversity of approaches and tasks. Among other
things, this means efforts by the conferences to ensure fair
reviews for the “niche” submissions.18 Putting all of our
eggs in the proverbial LLM basket runs the risk of missing
out on new research directions and exciting opportunities
to make significant connections with other fields, such as
linguistics and cognitive science.
Defining terminology. We discussed the lack of clarity on the
very term “large language model” (§2), as well as “emergent
properties” (§3.5). Ideally, at least in research papers we
would start with specifying what we mean by a common-but-
vague term – e.g. “vision-and-language Transformer model”
or “a Transformer-based autoregressive language model
with 200 billion parameters”. Although it is impossible
to control what terminology is used in popular science or
journalism about LLMs, as experts and researchers we have
a responsibility to be clear and precise when discussing our
domain of expertise (see LaCroix & Prince (2023)).
Not using “closed” models as baselines. Since the launch of
GPT-4 in March 2023, numerous studies have used it both as
a benchmark to compare different methods and models (e.g.
Liu et al., 2023a; Sun et al., 2023) as well as an object
of scientific study in itself (e.g. Bubeck et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2023). We believe that this is
problematic for several reasons:
18E.g. papers on “niche” topics can have priority in reviewer
assignments (Rogers et al., 2023b).
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
• It may produce inflated performance reports due to
undisclosed training data, which could be contaminated
with benchmark data. This could then create the false
impression that the “closed” model is intrinsically so
much better that there is no competing with it.
• It normalizes methodologically dubious apples-to-
oranges comparisons to black box models.
• The reproducibility of evaluations is significantly re-
duced (see §4).
• Where the “closed” models are provided commercially,
academic researchers essentially perform free work to
help the company improve their product – and they
even pay19 for that privilege, often with funding from
public grants that could be spent on improving the
public resources. Moreover, if the general perception is
that only this kind of work constitutes “frontier” LLM
research, the labs without the financial means to pay
for the API access are at severe disadvantage, and the
field gets homogenized even further.
While we recognize that some analyses of proprietary,
“closed” models like GPT-4 and PaLM can be useful (e.g.
audits, red-teaming), relying on these models as baselines,
and especially expecting others to do so, is both unfair
and unreliable. We recommend using open-source or at
least open-access 20 models like FLAN-T5 (Chung et al.,
2022), BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022), LLaMa (Touvron et al.,
2023a;b) and FALCON (Almazrouei et al., 2023).
Further rigorous studies of LLM functionality. There are
numerous knowledge gaps about LLM fuctionality. What
exactly makes a given type of model (e.g. a Transformer-
based LLM) SOTA on a given task, given that there are no
confounds such as differences in training data and model
capacity? What kinds of brittleness do LLMs exhibit, and
how to mitigate that? Do they really have any emergent
properties (and how are these defined)? How can we en-
sure specific kinds of robustness? Large-scale benchmarks
(e.g. Srivastava et al., 2023) do not address these questions,
19According to one US academic researcher we spoke to, the
monthly spending on OpenAI API in their lab is capped at $10K a
month, and otherwise would sometimes even exceed that sum.
20We do not advocate for using only open-source models, be-
cause the models available now can be “open” in different relevant
ways (code, weights, license, training data), and these aspects
matter more/less for different research questions and real-world
applications (Solaiman, 2023). A model like Mistral (Jiang et al.,
2023) is more transparent than GPT-4 in terms of its architecture,
but not the training data. A model like BLOOM (Le Scao et al.,
2023) is more transparent in terms of training data and can be
an excellent object of research, but it is not strictly open-source,
e.g. because of its RAIL license. Our position is that in research,
we should aim to use the most transparent options available, and
thankfully there seems to be a trend towards more openness in this
sense (e.g. the recent OLMO model (Groeneveld et al., 2024) and
its training dataset DOLMa (Soldaini et al., 2024)).
since they are constructed on the basis of data availability
rather than definitions of specific phenomena (Raji et al.,
2021). These questions are not answered by the current
large-scale evaluation endeavors (e.g. Liang et al., 2022).
While they are very valuable, there are too many confound-
ing variables in the published models, and more extensive
error analysis and exploration is needed to disentangle them.
Access to both models and their training data is especially
important for this purpose, since it can help establish links
between LLM behavior and their training data (Piktus et al.,
2023) and understand their biases (Gururangan et al., 2022;
Johnson et al., 2022; Abid et al., 2021).
Developing better evaluation methodology. There has been
progress towards multi-dimensional evaluation that takes
into account more than performance (Ethayarajh & Juraf-
sky, 2020; Liang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2023) and repro-
ducibility (Dodge et al., 2019; Ulmer et al., 2022; Magnus-
son et al., 2023), but much more remains to be done. There
is also a dire need for structural incentives to encourage
reproducibility efforts and publication of negative results.
And most importantly, we need a lot more work on the valid-
ity of the underlying constructs (Raji et al., 2021; Schlangen,
2021). Ideally, LLM evaluation would target specific types
of language processing rather than broadly defined tasks
(Ribeiro et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2023a). It would care-
fully explore the decision boundaries and specific kinds of
brittleness (Kaushik et al., 2019; Gardner et al., 2020), and
control for potential confounds so as to focus purely on
model architecture. As discussed in §3.5, we also need new
methodology for systematically linking the model outputs
to potential evidence in the training data at LLM scale –
relevant current efforts include the work on memorization
(Thakkar et al., 2021; Carlini et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2023,
inter alia) and providing search indices for LLM training
data (Piktus et al., 2023; Marone & Van Durme, 2023). All
this is in parallel to the general problems with evaluating
open-ended generation, including the dependence on gener-
ation strategies (Meister & Cotterell, 2021), and issues with
popular metrics such as perplexity (Wang et al., 2022a).
6. Conclusion
As researchers, we cannot help but observe the near-
universal focus on LLMs in recent years and their impact on
our field. This paper discusses several knowledge gaps and
common claims that should be taken with a grain of salt, as
well as the ways in which LLMs changed the research land-
scape. We argue for more rigor in definitions, experimental
studies, and evaluation methodology, as well as higher stan-
dards for transparency and reproducibility. We hope to open
the door for more discussion of the contribution of LLMs to
ML research, and how we can better leverage their strengths
while understanding their limitations.
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all anonymous reviewers of this pa-
per. Their insightful comments were invaluable for sharpen-
ing the discussion. Rob van der Goot, Christian Hardmeier,
Yacine Jernite, Margaret Mitchell, Dennis Ulmer read the
early versions of this paper and provided feedback. We also
thank Ryan Cotterell, Ishita Dasgupta, Laura Gwilliams,
Julia Haas, Anna Ivanova, Tal Linzen, Ben Lipkin, Asad
Sayeed for their insights and discussion.
This work was partly supported by DFF Inge Lehmann grant
to Anna Rogers (3160-00022B).
Impact Statement
This work is a position paper, expressing the personal views
of its authors, and supported by evidence and arguments
we cite rather than new experimental work. Our goal is not
to criticize a specific research direction or technology as a
whole, but to raise the awareness about the issues with the
lack of clarity with key terms and claims in our field.
We recognize that we come from a position of privilege,
holding positions at institutions located in the Global North.
Our opinions do not reflect the lived experiences of visible
minorities or those who come from less privileged insti-
tutions and geographical regions. We have endeavored to
have our manuscript read by colleagues from other domains
of expertise and other institutions, but we recognize that it
does not represent the experiences and perspectives of all
members of the ML community.
References
Abdalla, M. and Abdalla, M. The Grey Hoodie Project: Big
tobacco, big tech, and the threat on academic integrity.
In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society, pp. 287–297, 2021.
Abdalla, M., Wahle, J. P., Ruas, T., Névéol, A., Ducel,
F., Mohammad, S. M., and Fort, K. The Elephant
in the Room: Analyzing the Presence of Big Tech in
Natural Language Processing Research. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.02797, 2023.
Abid, A., Farooqi, M., and Zou, J. Persistent anti-Muslim
bias in Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the
2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,
pp. 298–306, 2021.
Ahmed, N. and Wahed, M. The de-democratization of
AI: Deep learning and the compute divide in artificial
intelligence research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.15581,
2020.
Alabdulmohsin, I. M., Neyshabur, B., and Zhai, X. Revisit-
ing neural scaling laws in language and vision. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:22300–
22312, 2022.
Almazrouei, E., Alobeidli, H., Alshamsi, A., Cappelli, A.,
Cojocaru, R., Debbah, M., Goffinet, E., Heslow, D., Lau-
nay, J., Malartic, Q., Noune, B., Pannier, B., and Penedo,
G. Falcon-40B: an open large language model with state-
of-the-art performance. arxiv, 2023.
Alyafeai, Z., AlShaibani, M. S., and Ahmad, I. A Survey
on Transfer Learning in Natural Language Processing.
arXiv:2007.04239 [cs, stat], May 2020.
Anderljung, M., Barnhart, J., Korinek, A., Leung, J.,
O’Keefe, C., Whittlestone, J., Avin, S., Brundage, M.,
Bullock, J., Cass-Beggs, D., Chang, B., Collins, T., Fist,
T., Hadfield, G., Hayes, A., Ho, L., Hooker, S., Horvitz,
E., Kolt, N., Schuett, J., Shavit, Y ., Siddarth, D., Trager,
R., and Wolf, K. Frontier AI Regulation: Managing
Emerging Risks to Public Safety, November 2023.
Anil, R., Dai, A. M., Firat, O., Johnson, M., Lepikhin, D.,
Passos, A., Shakeri, S., Taropa, E., Bailey, P., Chen, Z.,
Chu, E., Clark, J. H., Shafey, L. E., Huang, Y ., Meier-
Hellstern, K., Mishra, G., Moreira, E., Omernick, M.,
Robinson, K., Ruder, S., Tay, Y ., Xiao, K., Xu, Y ., Zhang,
Y ., Abrego, G. H., Ahn, J., Austin, J., Barham, P., Botha,
J., Bradbury, J., Brahma, S., Brooks, K., Catasta, M.,
Cheng, Y ., Cherry, C., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Chowd-
hery, A., Crepy, C., Dave, S., Dehghani, M., Dev, S.,
Devlin, J., Díaz, M., Du, N., Dyer, E., Feinberg, V ., Feng,
F., Fienber, V ., Freitag, M., Garcia, X., Gehrmann, S.,
Gonzalez, L., Gur-Ari, G., Hand, S., Hashemi, H., Hou,
L., Howland, J., Hu, A., Hui, J., Hurwitz, J., Isard, M., It-
tycheriah, A., Jagielski, M., Jia, W., Kenealy, K., Krikun,
M., Kudugunta, S., Lan, C., Lee, K., Lee, B., Li, E., Li,
M., Li, W., Li, Y ., Li, J., Lim, H., Lin, H., Liu, Z., Liu,
F., Maggioni, M., Mahendru, A., Maynez, J., Misra, V .,
Moussalem, M., Nado, Z., Nham, J., Ni, E., Nystrom, A.,
Parrish, A., Pellat, M., Polacek, M., Polozov, A., Pope,
R., Qiao, S., Reif, E., Richter, B., Riley, P., Ros, A. C.,
Roy, A., Saeta, B., Samuel, R., Shelby, R., Slone, A.,
Smilkov, D., So, D. R., Sohn, D., Tokumine, S., Valter,
D., Vasudevan, V ., V odrahalli, K., Wang, X., Wang, P.,
Wang, Z., Wang, T., Wieting, J., Wu, Y ., Xu, K., Xu, Y .,
Xue, L., Yin, P., Yu, J., Zhang, Q., Zheng, S., Zheng,
C., Zhou, W., Zhou, D., Petrov, S., and Wu, Y . PaLM 2
Technical Report, 2023.
Bang, Y ., Cahyawijaya, S., Lee, N., Dai, W., Su, D., Wilie,
B., Lovenia, H., Ji, Z., Yu, T., Chung, W., Do, Q. V ., Xu,
Y ., and Fung, P. A Multitask, Multilingual, Multimodal
Evaluation of ChatGPT on Reasoning, Hallucination, and
Interactivity, 2023.
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Bekar, C., Carlaw, K., and Lipsey, R. General purpose
technologies in theory, application and controversy: a
review. Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 28:1005–
1033, 2018.
Beltagy, I., Lo, K., and Cohan, A. SciBERT: A pre-
trained language model for scientific text. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.10676, 2019.
Belz, A. A metrological perspective on reproducibility
in NLP. Computational Linguistics, 48(4):1125–1135,
2022.
Belz, A., Agarwal, S., Shimorina, A., and Reiter, E. A
systematic review of reproducibility research in Natural
Language Processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07929,
2021.
Belz, A., Popovi ´c, M., and Mille, S. Quantified repro-
ducibility assessment of nlp results. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05961, 2022.
Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and
Shmitchell, S. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots:
Can Language Models Be Too Big? Proceedings of the
2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, 2021.
Bhargava, P., Drozd, A., and Rogers, A. Generalization in
NLI: Ways (Not) To Go Beyond Simple Heuristics. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Insights from
Negative Results in NLP, pp. 125–135, Online and Punta
Cana, Dominican Republic, nov 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Bianchini, S., Müller, M., and Pelletier, P. Deep learning in
science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01575, 2020.
Birhane, A., Kalluri, P., Card, D., Agnew, W., Dotan, R., and
Bao, M. The values encoded in machine learning research.
In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency, pp. 173–184, 2022.
Blevins, T. and Zettlemoyer, L. Language contamination
helps explains the cross-lingual capabilities of english pre-
trained models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 3563–3574, 2022.
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R.,
Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosse-
lut, A., Brunskill, E., et al. On the opportunities and risks
of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258,
2021.
Bouthillier, X., Laurent, C., and Vincent, P. Unreproducible
research is reproducible. In Chaudhuri, K. and Salakhut-
dinov, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 725–734. PMLR,
09–15 Jun 2019.
Branco, R., Branco, A., Rodrigues, J., and Silva, J. Short-
cutted commonsense: Data spuriousness in deep learning
of commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 1504–1521, 2021.
Bresnahan, T. Artificial intelligence technologies and aggre-
gate growth prospects. Prospects for Economic Growth
in the United States, 2019.
Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan,
J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-V oss, A., Krueger, G.,
Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D. M., Wu,
J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M.,
Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish,
S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. Language
Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), June
2020.
Bubeck, S., Chandrasekaran, V ., Eldan, R., Gehrke, J.,
Horvitz, E., Kamar, E., Lee, P., Lee, Y . T., Li, Y .,
Lundberg, S., et al. Sparks of Artificial General Intelli-
gence: Early experiments with GPT-4. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12712, 2023.
Carlini, N., Ippolito, D., Jagielski, M., Lee, K., Tramer, F.,
and Zhang, C. Quantifying memorization across neu-
ral language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07646,
2022.
Chan, S., Santoro, A., Lampinen, A., Wang, J., Singh, A.,
Richemond, P., McClelland, J., and Hill, F. Data Distri-
butional Properties Drive Emergent In-Context Learning
in Transformers. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 35:18878–18891, December 2022.
Chang, K. K., Cramer, M., Soni, S., and Bamman, D.
Speak, Memory: An Archaeology of Books Known to
ChatGPT/GPT-4, 2023.
Chang, T. A. and Bergen, B. K. Language model
behavior: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.11504, 2023.
Chelba, C., Mikolov, T., Schuster, M., Ge, Q., Brants,
T., Koehn, P., and Robinson, T. One Billion Word
Benchmark for Measuring Progress in Statistical Lan-
guage Modeling. Technical report, Google, 2013. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.3005.
Chen, L., Zaharia, M., and Zou, J. How is ChatGPT’s behav-
ior changing over time? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09009,
2023.
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Chollet, F. On the Measure of Intelligence.
arXiv:1911.01547 [cs], November 2019.
Choudhury, S. R., Rogers, A., and Augenstein, I. Machine
Reading, Fast and Slow: When Do Models" Understand"
Language? arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07430, 2022.
Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Devlin, J., Bosma, M., Mishra,
G., Roberts, A., Barham, P., Chung, H. W., Sutton, C.,
Gehrmann, S., et al. PaLM: Scaling language modeling
with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Chung, H. W., Hou, L., Longpre, S., Zoph, B., Tay, Y .,
Fedus, W., Li, E., Wang, X., Dehghani, M., Brahma, S.,
Webson, A., Gu, S. S., Dai, Z., Suzgun, M., Chen, X.,
Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Mishra, G., Yu, A., Zhao, V .,
Huang, Y ., Dai, A., Yu, H., Petrov, S., Chi, E. H., Dean,
J., Devlin, J., Roberts, A., Zhou, D., Le, Q. V ., and Wei, J.
Scaling Instruction-Finetuned Language Models, 2022.
Chung, J.-W., Liu, J., Wu, Z., Xia, Y ., and Chowdhury, M.
ML.ENERGY leaderboard, 2023.
Clark, K., Luong, M.-T., Le, Q. V ., and Manning, C. D.
ELECTRA: Pre-training Text Encoders as Discriminators
Rather Than Generators. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2020.
Cohen, K. B., Xia, J., Zweigenbaum, P., Callahan, T., Har-
graves, O., Goss, F., Ide, N., Névéol, A., Grouin, C., and
Hunter, L. Three dimensions of reproducibility in natu-
ral language processing. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2018), 2018.
Crafts, N. Artificial intelligence as a general-purpose tech-
nology: an historical perspective. Oxford Review of Eco-
nomic Policy, 37(3), 2021.
Crane, M. Questionable Answers in Question Answering
Research: Reproducibility and Variability of Published
Results. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 6:241–252, 2018. doi: 10.1162/tacl_
a_00018.
Deshpande, V ., Pechi, D., Thatte, S., Lialin, V ., and
Rumshisky, A. Honey, I shrunk the language: Language
model behavior at reduced scale. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp.
5298–5314, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Lan-
guage Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186,
June 2019.
Dodge, J., Gururangan, S., Card, D., Schwartz, R., and
Smith, N. A. Show Your Work: Improved Reporting of
Experimental Results. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2185–2194,
Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for
Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1224.
Dodge, J., Sap, M., Marasovi´c, A., Agnew, W., Ilharco, G.,
Groeneveld, D., Mitchell, M., and Gardner, M. Docu-
menting Large Webtext Corpora: A Case Study on the
Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus, 2021.
Eloundou, T., Manning, S., Mishkin, P., and Rock, D.
GPTs are GPTs: An early look at the labor market im-
pact potential of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.10130, 2023.
EMNLP. Emnlp 2023 call for main conference papers theme
track: Large language models and the future of nlp, 2023.
Ethayarajh, K. and Jurafsky, D. Utility is in the eye of the
user: A critique of nlp leaderboards. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4846–4853, Online,
November 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Gan, C. and Mori, T. Sensitivity and Robustness of Large
Language Models to Prompt Template in Japanese Text
Classification Tasks, June 2023.
Gao, T., Fisch, A., and Chen, D. Making pre-trained
language models better few-shot learners. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 3816–3830, Online, August
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.295.
Gardner, M., Artzi, Y ., Basmova, V ., Berant, J., Bogin, B.,
Chen, S., Dasigi, P., Dua, D., Elazar, Y ., Gottumukkala,
A., Gupta, N., Hajishirzi, H., Ilharco, G., Khashabi, D.,
Lin, K., Liu, J., Liu, N. F., Mulcaire, P., Ning, Q., Singh,
S., Smith, N. A., Subramanian, S., Tsarfaty, R., Wallace,
E., Zhang, A., and Zhou, B. Evaluating NLP Models via
Contrast Sets. April 2020.
Gardner, M., Merrill, W., Dodge, J., Peters, M. E., Ross, A.,
Singh, S., and Smith, N. A. Competency problems: On
finding and removing artifacts in language data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.08646, 2021.
Ghorbani, B., Firat, O., Freitag, M., Bapna, A., Krikun,
M., Garcia, X., Chelba, C., and Cherry, C. Scaling
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
laws for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07740, 2021.
Gillioz, A., Casas, J., Mugellini, E., and Abou Khaled,
O. Overview of the Transformer-based Models for NLP
Tasks. In 2020 15th Conference on Computer Science
and Information Systems (FedCSIS), pp. 179–183. IEEE,
2020.
Graber-Stiehl, I. Is the world ready for ChatGPT therapists?
Nature, 617(7959):22–24, 2023.
Groeneveld, D., Beltagy, I., Walsh, P., Bhagia, A., Kinney,
R., Tafjord, O., Jha, A. H., Ivison, H., Magnusson, I.,
Wang, Y ., et al. Olmo: Accelerating the science of lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838, 2024.
Gunasekar, S., Zhang, Y ., Aneja, J., Mendes, C. C. T.,
Giorno, A. D., Gopi, S., Javaheripi, M., Kauffmann, P.,
de Rosa, G., Saarikivi, O., Salim, A., Shah, S., Behl,
H. S., Wang, X., Bubeck, S., Eldan, R., Kalai, A. T., Lee,
Y . T., and Li, Y . Textbooks are all you need, 2023.
Gururangan, S., Card, D., Dreier, S. K., Gade, E. K., Wang,
L. Z., Wang, Z., Zettlemoyer, L., and Smith, N. A.
Whose language counts as high quality? measuring lan-
guage ideologies in text data selection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.10474, 2022.
Hagmann, M., Meier, P., and Riezler, S. Towards inferential
reproducibility of machine learning research, 2023.
Halliday, M. and Hasan, R. Cohesion in English. Routledge,
London, 0 edition, 2013. ISBN 978-1-317-86960-3. doi:
10.4324/9781315836010.
Harrer, S. Attention is not all you need: the complicated case
of ethically using large language models in healthcare and
medicine. EBioMedicine, 90, 2023.
Heaven, D. et al. Why deep-learning AIs are so easy to fool.
Nature, 574(7777):163–166, 2019.
Hendrycks, D., Lee, K., and Mazeika, M. Using pre-training
can improve model robustness and uncertainty. InInterna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2712–2721.
PMLR, 2019.
Hendrycks, D., Liu, X., Wallace, E., Dziedzic, A., Krishnan,
R., and Song, D. Pretrained transformers improve out-of-
distribution robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06100,
2020.
Hernandez, D., Kaplan, J., Henighan, T., and McCan-
dlish, S. Scaling Laws for Transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E.,
Cai, T., Rutherford, E., de Las Casas, D., Hendricks,
L. A., Welbl, J., Clark, A., Hennigan, T., Noland, E.,
Millican, K., van den Driessche, G., Damoc, B., Guy,
A., Osindero, S., Simonyan, K., Elsen, E., Rae, J. W.,
Vinyals, O., and Sifre, L. Training Compute-Optimal
Large Language Models, 2022.
Huang, H., Tang, T., Zhang, D., Zhao, W. X., Song, T.,
Xia, Y ., and Wei, F. Not All Languages Are Created
Equal in LLMs: Improving Multilingual Capability by
Cross-Lingual-Thought Prompting, 2023a.
Huang, J., Gu, S. S., Hou, L., Wu, Y ., Wang, X., Yu, H.,
and Han, J. Large language models can self-improve. In
The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2023b.
Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Mensch, A., Bamford, C.,
Chaplot, D. S., Casas, D. d. l., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G.,
Lample, G., Saulnier, L., et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Jiao, X., Yin, Y ., Shang, L., Jiang, X., Chen, X., Li, L.,
Wang, F., and Liu, Q. TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for
natural language understanding. Findings of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 ,
2020.
Johnson, R. L., Pistilli, G., Menédez-González, N., Duran,
L. D. D., Panai, E., Kalpokiene, J., and Bertulfo, D. J. The
Ghost in the Machine has an American accent: value con-
flict in GPT-3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07785, 2022.
Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. H. Speech and Lan-
guage Processing (3rd Ed. Draft) . February
2024. URL https://web.stanford.edu/
~jurafsky/slp3/ed3book.pdf.
Kadavath, S., Conerly, T., Askell, A., Henighan, T., Drain,
D., Perez, E., Schiefer, N., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., DasSarma,
N., Tran-Johnson, E., Johnston, S., El-Showk, S., Jones,
A., Elhage, N., Hume, T., Chen, A., Bai, Y ., Bowman,
S., Fort, S., Ganguli, D., Hernandez, D., Jacobson, J.,
Kernion, J., Kravec, S., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K., Olsson,
C., Ringer, S., Amodei, D., Brown, T., Clark, J., Joseph,
N., Mann, B., McCandlish, S., Olah, C., and Kaplan, J.
Language Models (Mostly) Know What They Know, nov
2022.
Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B.,
Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and
Amodei, D. Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Kasneci, E., Seßler, K., Küchemann, S., Bannert, M., De-
mentieva, D., Fischer, F., Gasser, U., Groh, G., Günne-
mann, S., Hüllermeier, E., et al. ChatGPT for good? on
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
opportunities and challenges of large language models
for education. Learning and Individual Differences, 103:
102274, 2023.
Katz, D. M., Bommarito, M. J., Gao, S., and Arredondo, P.
GPT-4 Passes the Bar Exam, March 2023.
Kaushik, D., Hovy, E., and Lipton, Z. Learning The Dif-
ference That Makes A Difference With Counterfactually-
Augmented Data. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, September 2019.
Knell, M. and Vannuccini, S. Tools and concepts for un-
derstanding disruptive technological change after schum-
peter. Technical report, Jena Economic Research Papers,
2022.
Knight, W. OpenAI’s CEO Says the Age of Giant AI Models
Is Already Over. https://www.wired.com/story/openai-
ceo-sam-altman-the-age-of-giant-ai-models-is-already-
over, 2023.
Kuttan, J. How Enterprises Can Become Ready To Work
With LLMs. Forbes, 2023.
LaCroix, T. and Prince, S. J. D. Ethics and deep learning,
2023.
Lai, V . D., Ngo, N. T., Veyseh, A. P. B., Man, H., Dernon-
court, F., Bui, T., and Nguyen, T. H. ChatGPT Beyond
English: Towards a Comprehensive Evaluation of Large
Language Models in Multilingual Learning, 2023.
Le Scao, T., Fan, A., Akiki, C., Pavlick, E., Ili´c, S., Hesslow,
D., Castagné, R., Luccioni, A. S., Yvon, F., Gallé, M.,
et al. BLOOM: A 176b-parameter open-access multilin-
gual language model. 2023.
Lee, P., Bubeck, S., and Petro, J. Benefits, Limits, and Risks
of GPT-4 as an AI Chatbot for Medicine. New England
Journal of Medicine, 388(13):1233–1239, March 2023.
ISSN 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsr2214184.
Lenat, D. and Feigenbaum, E. A. On the thresholds of
knowledge. MIT Press Cambridge, MA, 1981.
Lewis, P., Stenetorp, P., and Riedel, S. Question and an-
swer test-train overlap in open-domain question answer-
ing datasets. In Merlo, P., Tiedemann, J., and Tsarfaty,
R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the Eu-
ropean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 1000–1008, Online, April
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.86.
Liang, P., Bommasani, R., Lee, T., Tsipras, D., Soylu, D.,
Yasunaga, M., Zhang, Y ., Narayanan, D., Wu, Y ., Kumar,
A., et al. Holistic evaluation of language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.09110, 2022.
Lin, Y ., Michel, J.-B., Lieberman, E. A., Orwant, J., Brock-
man, W., and Petrov, S. Syntactic annotations for the
google books ngram corpus. In Proceedings of the ACL
2012 system demonstrations, pp. 169–174, 2012.
Lipsey, R. G., Carlaw, K. I., and Bekar, C. T. Economic
transformations: general purpose technologies and long-
term economic growth. Oup Oxford, 2005.
Liu, H., Ning, R., Teng, Z., Liu, J., Zhou, Q., and Zhang, Y .
Evaluating the logical reasoning ability of ChatGPT and
GPT-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03439, 2023a.
Liu, J., Xu, X., Li, Y ., and Tan, Y . "generate" the future of
work through AI: Empirical evidence from online labor
markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05201, 2023b.
Liu, P., Yuan, W., Fu, J., Jiang, Z., Hayashi, H., and Neubig,
G. Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of
prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM
Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023c.
Liu, Y ., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D.,
Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Stoyanov, V .
RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Ap-
proach. arXiv:1907.11692 [cs], jul 2019.
Lu, S., Bigoulaeva, I., Sachdeva, R., Madabushi, H. T., and
Gurevych, I. Are emergent abilities in large language
models just in-context learning?, 2023.
Lu, Y ., Bartolo, M., Moore, A., Riedel, S., and Stenetorp,
P. Fantastically ordered prompts and where to find them:
Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.08786, 2021.
Magar, I. and Schwartz, R. Data contamination:
From memorization to exploitation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.08242, 2022.
Magnusson, I., Smith, N. A., and Dodge, J. Reproducibil-
ity in NLP: What have we learned from the checklist?
In Rogers, A., Boyd-Graber, J., and Okazaki, N. (eds.),
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: ACL 2023, pp. 12789–12811, Toronto, Canada, July
2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.809.
Marone, M. and Van Durme, B. Data Portraits: Recording
Foundation Model Training Data, March 2023.
Martínez, E. Re-Evaluating GPT-4’s Bar Exam Perfor-
mance, May 2023.
McCoy, R. T., Pavlick, E., and Linzen, T. Right for the
wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuristics in Natural
Language Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01007,
2019.
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
McCoy, R. T., Min, J., and Linzen, T. BERTs of a feather
do not generalize together: Large variability in general-
ization across models with similar test set performance.
In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,
Online, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
McCoy, R. T., Yao, S., Friedman, D., Hardy, M., and Grif-
fiths, T. L. Embers of autoregression: Understanding
large language models through the problem they are
trained to solve, 2023.
McKelvey, F., Dandurand, G., and Roberge, J. News cov-
erage of artificial intelligence reflects business and gov-
ernment hype — not critical voices. The Conversation,
April 2023.
McKendrick, J. Why GPT Should Stand For ‘General Pur-
pose Technology’ For All.Forbes, 2023.
McKenzie, I., Lyzhov, A., Parrish, A., Prabhu, A., Mueller,
A., Kim, N., Bowman, S., and Perez, E. The Inverse
Scaling Prize, 2022.
Meister, C. and Cotterell, R. Language Model Evaluation
Beyond Perplexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00085 ,
2021.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2013.
Nalbandian, L. An eye for an ‘i:’a critical assessment of
artificial intelligence tools in migration and asylum man-
agement. Comparative Migration Studies, 10(1):1–23,
2022.
Natale, S. and Ballatore, A. Imagining the thinking machine:
Technological myths and the rise of artificial intelligence.
Convergence, 26(1):3–18, 2020.
Nye, M., Andreassen, A. J., Gur-Ari, G., Michalewski, H.,
Austin, J., Bieber, D., Dohan, D., Lewkowycz, A., Bosma,
M., Luan, D., Sutton, C., and Odena, A. Show Your
Work: Scratchpads for Intermediate Computation with
Language Models. oct 2021.
O’Connor, T. and Wong, H. Y . Emergent Properties.Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, August 2020.
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report, 2023.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright,
C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K.,
Ray, A., Schulman, J., Hilton, J., Kelton, F., Miller, L.,
Simens, M., Askell, A., Welinder, P., Christiano, P., Leike,
J., and Lowe, R. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback, mar 2022.
Pan, H., Wang, C., Qiu, M., Zhang, Y ., Li, Y ., and Huang,
J. Meta-KD: A meta knowledge distillation framework
for language model compression across domains. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.01266, 2020.
Pan, S. J. and Yang, Q. A Survey on Transfer Learning.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
22(10):1345–1359, October 2010. ISSN 1558-2191. doi:
10.1109/TKDE.2009.191.
Perez, E., Kiela, D., and Cho, K. True Few-Shot Learning
with Language Models. In Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer,
A., Dauphin, Y ., Liang, P., and Vaughan, J. W. (eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 34, pp. 11054–11070. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Piktus, A., Akiki, C., Villegas, P., Laurençon, H., Dupont,
G., Luccioni, A. S., Jernite, Y ., and Rogers, A. The
ROOTS Search Tool: Data Transparency for LLMs. Pro-
ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demon-
strations), 2023.
Prytkova, E. ICT’s Wide Web: a System-Level Analysis
of ICT’s Industrial Diffusion with Algorithmic Links.
Available at SSRN 3772429, 2021.
Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I.,
et al. Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training. OpenAI blog, 2018.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D.,
Sutskever, I., et al. Language models are unsupervised
multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Raji, I. D., Denton, E., Bender, E. M., Hanna, A., and
Paullada, A. AI and the Everything in the Whole Wide
World Benchmark. In Proceedings of the Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Bench-
marks 1 Pre-Proceedings (NeurIPS Datasets and Bench-
marks 2021), August 2021.
Ramponi, A. and Plank, B. Neural Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation in NLP—A Survey. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pp. 6838–6855, Barcelona, Spain (Online), December
2020. International Committee on Computational Lin-
guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.603.
Ray Choudhury, S., Rogers, A., and Augenstein, I. Machine
Reading, Fast and Slow: When Do Models “Understand”
Language? In Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics , pp. 78–93,
Gyeongju, Republic of Korea, October 2022. Interna-
tional Committee on Computational Linguistics.
15


===== PAGE 16 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Ribeiro, M. T., Wu, T., Guestrin, C., and Singh, S. Be-
yond Accuracy: Behavioral Testing of NLP Models with
CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4902–
4912, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Rogers, A. Closed AI Models Make Bad Baselines.Hacking
semantics, April 2023.
Rogers, A., Kovaleva, O., Downey, M., and Rumshisky,
A. Getting closer to AI complete question answering:
A set of prerequisite real tasks. In Proceedings of the
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp.
8722–8731, 2020.
Rogers, A., Gardner, M., and Augenstein, I. QA Dataset
Explosion: A Taxonomy of NLP Resources for Question
Answering and Reading Comprehension. ACM Comput-
ing Surveys, 55(10):197:1–197:45, February 2023a. ISSN
0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3560260.
Rogers, A., Karpinska, M., Boyd-Graber, J., and Okazaki,
N. Program chairs’ report on peer review at ACL 2023.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. xl–lxxv, Toronto, Canada, July 2023b. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Roose, K. How does ChatGPT really work?, 2023.
Sambasivan, N., Kapania, S., Highfill, H., Akrong, D., Par-
itosh, P., and Aroyo, L. M. "Everyone wants to do the
model work, not the data work": Data Cascades in High-
Stakes AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’21, pp.
1–15, New York, NY , USA, May 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6. doi:
10.1145/3411764.3445518.
Sanh, V ., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., and Wolf, T. DistilBERT,
a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and
lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Sap, M., LeBras, R., Fried, D., and Choi, Y . Neural Theory-
of-Mind? On the Limits of Social Intelligence in Large
LMs, 2023.
Scao, T. L., Fan, A., Akiki, C., Pavlick, E., Ili´c, S., Hesslow,
D., Castagné, R., Luccioni, A. S., Yvon, F., Gallé, M.,
et al. BLOOM: A 176b-parameter open-access multilin-
gual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100,
2022.
Schaeffer, R., Miranda, B., and Koyejo, S. Are Emergent
Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.15004, 2023.
Schick, T. and Schütze, H. It’s Not Just Size That Mat-
ters: Small Language Models Are Also Few-Shot Learn-
ers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2339–
2352, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.185.
Schlangen, D. Targeting the Benchmark: On Methodology
in Current Natural Language Processing Research. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 670–674, Online, August
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-short.85.
Sellam, T., Yadlowsky, S., Wei, J., Saphra, N., D’Amour, A.,
Linzen, T., Bastings, J., Turc, I., Eisenstein, J., Das, D.,
Tenney, I., and Pavlick, E. The MultiBERTs: BERT Re-
productions for Robustness Analysis. arXiv:2106.16163
[cs], jun 2021.
Shapira, N., Levy, M., Alavi, S. H., Zhou, X., Choi, Y .,
Goldberg, Y ., Sap, M., and Shwartz, V . Clever Hans or
Neural Theory of Mind? Stress Testing Social Reasoning
in Large Language Models, May 2023.
Solaiman, I. The gradient of generative AIrelease: Methods
and considerations. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM
conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency,
pp. 111–122, 2023.
Soldaini, L., Kinney, R., Bhagia, A., Schwenk, D., Atkinson,
D., Authur, R., Bogin, B., Chandu, K., Dumas, J., Elazar,
Y ., et al. Dolma: An open corpus of three trillion tokens
for language model pretraining research. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.00159, 2024.
Srinivasan, V ., Gandhi, D., Thakker, U., and Prabhakar,
R. Training Large Language Models Efficiently with
Sparsity and Dataflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05511,
2023.
Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid,
A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A.,
Garriga-Alonso, A., Kluska, A., Lewkowycz, A., Agar-
wal, A., Power, A., Ray, A., Warstadt, A., Kocurek, A. W.,
Safaya, A., Tazarv, A., Xiang, A., Parrish, A., Nie, A.,
Hussain, A., Askell, A., Dsouza, A., Slone, A., Rahane,
A., Iyer, A. S., Andreassen, A., Madotto, A., Santilli, A.,
Stuhlmüller, A., Dai, A., La, A., Lampinen, A., Zou, A.,
Jiang, A., Chen, A., Vuong, A., Gupta, A., Gottardi, A.,
Norelli, A., Venkatesh, A., Gholamidavoodi, A., Tabas-
sum, A., Menezes, A., Kirubarajan, A., Mullokandov, A.,
Sabharwal, A., Herrick, A., Efrat, A., Erdem, A., Karaka¸ s,
A., Roberts, B. R., Loe, B. S., Zoph, B., Bojanowski, B.,
16


===== PAGE 17 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Özyurt, B., Hedayatnia, B., Neyshabur, B., Inden, B.,
Stein, B., Ekmekci, B., Lin, B. Y ., Howald, B., Orinion,
B., Diao, C., Dour, C., Stinson, C., Argueta, C., Ramírez,
C. F., Singh, C., Rathkopf, C., Meng, C., Baral, C., Wu,
C., Callison-Burch, C., Waites, C., V oigt, C., Manning,
C. D., Potts, C., Ramirez, C., Rivera, C. E., Siro, C.,
Raffel, C., Ashcraft, C., Garbacea, C., Sileo, D., Gar-
rette, D., Hendrycks, D., Kilman, D., Roth, D., Freeman,
D., Khashabi, D., Levy, D., González, D. M., Perszyk,
D., Hernandez, D., Chen, D., Ippolito, D., Gilboa, D.,
Dohan, D., Drakard, D., Jurgens, D., Datta, D., Gan-
guli, D., Emelin, D., Kleyko, D., Yuret, D., Chen, D.,
Tam, D., Hupkes, D., Misra, D., Buzan, D., Mollo, D. C.,
Yang, D., Lee, D.-H., Schrader, D., Shutova, E., Cubuk,
E. D., Segal, E., Hagerman, E., Barnes, E., Donoway,
E., Pavlick, E., Rodola, E., Lam, E., Chu, E., Tang, E.,
Erdem, E., Chang, E., Chi, E. A., Dyer, E., Jerzak, E.,
Kim, E., Manyasi, E. E., Zheltonozhskii, E., Xia, F., Siar,
F., Martínez-Plumed, F., Happé, F., Chollet, F., Rong,
F., Mishra, G., Winata, G. I., de Melo, G., Kruszewski,
G., Parascandolo, G., Mariani, G., Wang, G., Jaimovitch-
López, G., Betz, G., Gur-Ari, G., Galijasevic, H., Kim, H.,
Rashkin, H., Hajishirzi, H., Mehta, H., Bogar, H., Shevlin,
H., Schütze, H., Yakura, H., Zhang, H., Wong, H. M.,
Ng, I., Noble, I., Jumelet, J., Geissinger, J., Kernion, J.,
Hilton, J., Lee, J., Fisac, J. F., Simon, J. B., Koppel, J.,
Zheng, J., Zou, J., Koco ´n, J., Thompson, J., Wingfield,
J., Kaplan, J., Radom, J., Sohl-Dickstein, J., Phang, J.,
Wei, J., Yosinski, J., Novikova, J., Bosscher, J., Marsh,
J., Kim, J., Taal, J., Engel, J., Alabi, J., Xu, J., Song,
J., Tang, J., Waweru, J., Burden, J., Miller, J., Balis,
J. U., Batchelder, J., Berant, J., Frohberg, J., Rozen, J.,
Hernandez-Orallo, J., Boudeman, J., Guerr, J., Jones, J.,
Tenenbaum, J. B., Rule, J. S., Chua, J., Kanclerz, K.,
Livescu, K., Krauth, K., Gopalakrishnan, K., Ignatyeva,
K., Markert, K., Dhole, K. D., Gimpel, K., Omondi, K.,
Mathewson, K., Chiafullo, K., Shkaruta, K., Shridhar,
K., McDonell, K., Richardson, K., Reynolds, L., Gao,
L., Zhang, L., Dugan, L., Qin, L., Contreras-Ochando,
L., Morency, L.-P., Moschella, L., Lam, L., Noble, L.,
Schmidt, L., He, L., Colón, L. O., Metz, L., ¸ Senel, L. K.,
Bosma, M., Sap, M., ter Hoeve, M., Farooqi, M., Faruqui,
M., Mazeika, M., Baturan, M., Marelli, M., Maru, M.,
Quintana, M. J. R., Tolkiehn, M., Giulianelli, M., Lewis,
M., Potthast, M., Leavitt, M. L., Hagen, M., Schubert,
M., Baitemirova, M. O., Arnaud, M., McElrath, M., Yee,
M. A., Cohen, M., Gu, M., Ivanitskiy, M., Starritt, M.,
Strube, M., Sw˛ edrowski, M., Bevilacqua, M., Yasunaga,
M., Kale, M., Cain, M., Xu, M., Suzgun, M., Walker,
M., Tiwari, M., Bansal, M., Aminnaseri, M., Geva, M.,
Gheini, M., T, M. V ., Peng, N., Chi, N. A., Lee, N.,
Krakover, N. G.-A., Cameron, N., Roberts, N., Doiron,
N., Martinez, N., Nangia, N., Deckers, N., Muennighoff,
N., Keskar, N. S., Iyer, N. S., Constant, N., Fiedel, N.,
Wen, N., Zhang, O., Agha, O., Elbaghdadi, O., Levy,
O., Evans, O., Casares, P. A. M., Doshi, P., Fung, P.,
Liang, P. P., Vicol, P., Alipoormolabashi, P., Liao, P.,
Liang, P., Chang, P., Eckersley, P., Htut, P. M., Hwang, P.,
Miłkowski, P., Patil, P., Pezeshkpour, P., Oli, P., Mei, Q.,
Lyu, Q., Chen, Q., Banjade, R., Rudolph, R. E., Gabriel,
R., Habacker, R., Risco, R., Millière, R., Garg, R., Barnes,
R., Saurous, R. A., Arakawa, R., Raymaekers, R., Frank,
R., Sikand, R., Novak, R., Sitelew, R., LeBras, R., Liu,
R., Jacobs, R., Zhang, R., Salakhutdinov, R., Chi, R.,
Lee, R., Stovall, R., Teehan, R., Yang, R., Singh, S.,
Mohammad, S. M., Anand, S., Dillavou, S., Shleifer, S.,
Wiseman, S., Gruetter, S., Bowman, S. R., Schoenholz,
S. S., Han, S., Kwatra, S., Rous, S. A., Ghazarian, S.,
Ghosh, S., Casey, S., Bischoff, S., Gehrmann, S., Schus-
ter, S., Sadeghi, S., Hamdan, S., Zhou, S., Srivastava,
S., Shi, S., Singh, S., Asaadi, S., Gu, S. S., Pachchigar,
S., Toshniwal, S., Upadhyay, S., Shyamolima, Debnath,
Shakeri, S., Thormeyer, S., Melzi, S., Reddy, S., Makini,
S. P., Lee, S.-H., Torene, S., Hatwar, S., Dehaene, S.,
Divic, S., Ermon, S., Biderman, S., Lin, S., Prasad, S., Pi-
antadosi, S. T., Shieber, S. M., Misherghi, S., Kiritchenko,
S., Mishra, S., Linzen, T., Schuster, T., Li, T., Yu, T., Ali,
T., Hashimoto, T., Wu, T.-L., Desbordes, T., Rothschild,
T., Phan, T., Wang, T., Nkinyili, T., Schick, T., Kornev,
T., Tunduny, T., Gerstenberg, T., Chang, T., Neeraj, T.,
Khot, T., Shultz, T., Shaham, U., Misra, V ., Demberg,
V ., Nyamai, V ., Raunak, V ., Ramasesh, V ., Prabhu, V . U.,
Padmakumar, V ., Srikumar, V ., Fedus, W., Saunders, W.,
Zhang, W., V ossen, W., Ren, X., Tong, X., Zhao, X., Wu,
X., Shen, X., Yaghoobzadeh, Y ., Lakretz, Y ., Song, Y .,
Bahri, Y ., Choi, Y ., Yang, Y ., Hao, Y ., Chen, Y ., Belinkov,
Y ., Hou, Y ., Hou, Y ., Bai, Y ., Seid, Z., Zhao, Z., Wang, Z.,
Wang, Z. J., Wang, Z., and Wu, Z. Beyond the Imitation
Game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of
language models, 2023.
Sun, W., Yan, L., Ma, X., Ren, P., Yin, D., and Ren,
Z. Is ChatGPT good at search? investigating large
language models as re-ranking agent. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.09542, 2023.
Sutton, R. The bitter lesson (blog post). http:
//www.incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/
BitterLesson.html, 2019.
Tamkin, A., Brundage, M., Clark, J., and Ganguli, D.
Understanding the capabilities, limitations, and soci-
etal impact of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.02503, 2021.
Tay, Y ., Dehghani, M., Rao, J., Fedus, W., Abnar, S.,
Chung, H. W., Narang, S., Yogatama, D., Vaswani, A.,
and Metzler, D. Scale efficiently: Insights from pre-
training and fine-tuning transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.10686, 2021.
17


===== PAGE 18 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Taylor, R., Kardas, M., Cucurull, G., Scialom, T., Hartshorn,
A., Saravia, E., Poulton, A., Kerkez, V ., and Stojnic.
Galactica: A Large Language Model for Science, 2022.
Thakkar, O. D., Ramaswamy, S., Mathews, R., and Beau-
fays, F. Understanding unintended memorization in lan-
guage models under federated learning. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Privacy in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 1–10, 2021.
Thompson, N. C., Greenewald, K., Lee, K., and Manso,
G. F. The computational limits of deep learning, 2022.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux,
M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E.,
Azhar, F., et al. LLaMa: Open and efficient founda-
tion language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
2023a.
Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi,
A., Babaei, Y ., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P.,
Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 ,
2023b.
Ulmer, D., Bassignana, E., Müller-Eberstein, M., Varab,
D., Zhang, M., van der Goot, R., Hardmeier, C., and
Plank, B. Experimental standards for deep learning in
natural language processing research. In Goldberg, Y .,
Kozareva, Z., and Zhang, Y . (eds.),Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022,
pp. 2673–2692, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, De-
cember 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.196.
Veres, C. Large Language Models are Not Models of Nat-
ural Language: They are Corpus Models. IEEE Ac-
cess, 10:61970–61979, 2022. ISSN 2169-3536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3182505.
Wallace, E., Feng, S., Kandpal, N., Gardner, M., and Singh,
S. Universal Adversarial Triggers for Attacking and An-
alyzing NLP. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 2153–2162,
Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for
Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1221.
Wan, Z., Cheng, F., Mao, Z., Liu, Q., Song, H., Li, J., and
Kurohashi, S. GPT-RE: In-context learning for relation
extraction using large language models. In Bouamor,
H., Pino, J., and Bali, K. (eds.), Proceedings of the
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pp. 3534–3547, Singapore, December
2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.214.
Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y ., Nangia, N., Singh, A.,
Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S. R. Su-
perGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for General-Purpose
Language Understanding Systems. arXiv:1905.00537
[cs], may 2019.
Wang, S., Sun, X., Li, X., Ouyang, R., Wu, F., Zhang, T., Li,
J., and Wang, G. GPT-NER: Named Entity Recognition
via Large Language Models, 2023.
Wang, Y ., Deng, J., Sun, A., and Meng, X. Perplexity from
PLM Is Unreliable for Evaluating Text Quality. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.05892, 2022a.
Wang, Y ., Mishra, S., Alipoormolabashi, P., Kordi, Y .,
Mirzaei, A., Naik, A., Ashok, A., Dhanasekaran, A. S.,
Arunkumar, A., Stap, D., Pathak, E., Karamanolakis,
G., Lai, H., Purohit, I., Mondal, I., Anderson, J., Kuz-
nia, K., Doshi, K., Pal, K. K., Patel, M., Moradshahi,
M., Parmar, M., Purohit, M., Varshney, N., Kaza, P. R.,
Verma, P., Puri, R. S., Karia, R., Doshi, S., Sampat, S. K.,
Mishra, S., Reddy A, S., Patro, S., Dixit, T., and Shen,
X. Super-NaturalInstructions: Generalization via declar-
ative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pp. 5085–5109, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates, December 2022b. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Wei, J. Common arguments regarding emergent abili-
ties, May 2023. URL https://www.jasonwei.
net/blog/common-arguments-regarding-
emergent-abilities.
Wei, J., Bosma, M., Zhao, V ., Guu, K., Yu, A. W., Lester,
B., Du, N., Dai, A. M., and Le, Q. V . Finetuned Lan-
guage Models are Zero-Shot Learners. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, oct 2021.
Wei, J., Tay, Y ., Bommasani, R., Raffel, C., Zoph, B.,
Borgeaud, S., Yogatama, D., Bosma, M., Zhou, D., Met-
zler, D., Chi, E. H., Hashimoto, T., Vinyals, O., Liang,
P., Dean, J., and Fedus, W. Emergent Abilities of Large
Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2022a. ISSN 2835-8856.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., ichter, b.,
Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V ., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-Thought
Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models.
In Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D.,
Cho, K., and Oh, A. (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 35, pp. 24824–24837.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2022b.
Whittaker, M. The steep cost of capture. Interactions, 28
(6):50–55, 2021.
18


===== PAGE 19 =====
Position: Key Claims in LLM Research Have a Long Tail of Footnotes
Wu, Z., Qiu, L., Ross, A., Akyürek, E., Chen, B., Wang,
B., Kim, N., Andreas, J., and Kim, Y . Reasoning or
reciting? exploring the capabilities and limitations of
language models through counterfactual tasks, 2023.
Zakrzewski, C. e. a. OpenAI CEO tells Senate that he fears
AI’s potential to manipulate views, 2023.
Zhang, S., Roller, S., Goyal, N., Artetxe, M., Chen, M.,
Chen, S., Dewan, C., Diab, M., Li, X., Lin, X. V ., et al.
OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.
Zhang, S. J., Florin, S., Lee, A. N., Niknafs, E., Marginean,
A., Wang, A., Tyser, K., Chin, Z., Hicke, Y ., Singh, N.,
Udell, M., Kim, Y ., Buonassisi, T., Solar-Lezama, A.,
and Drori, I. Exploring the MIT Mathematics and EECS
Curriculum Using Large Language Models, 2023.
Zhao, Z., Wallace, E., Feng, S., Klein, D., and Singh, S.
Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot performance
of language models. In Meila, M. and Zhang, T. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pp. 12697–12706. PMLR, 18–24 Jul
2021.
Zhu, W., Liu, H., Dong, Q., Xu, J., Huang, S., Kong, L.,
Chen, J., and Li, L. Multilingual Machine Translation
with Large Language Models: Empirical Results and
Analysis, 2023.
Zhuang, F., Qi, Z., Duan, K., Xi, D., Zhu, Y ., Zhu, H.,
Xiong, H., and He, Q. A Comprehensive Survey on
Transfer Learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(1):43–
76, January 2021. ISSN 1558-2256. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.
2020.3004555.
Ziems, C., Held, W., Yang, J., Dhamala, J., Gupta, R.,
and Yang, D. Multi-V ALUE: A Framework for Cross-
Dialectal English NLP, 2023.
Zou, A., Wang, Z., Carlini, N., Nasr, M., Kolter, J. Z., and
Fredrikson, M. Universal and transferable adversarial
attacks on aligned language models, 2023.
19