

===== PAGE 1 =====
How Predictable Are Large Language Model Capabilities?
A Case Study on BIG-bench
Qinyuan Ye Harvey Yiyun Fu Xiang Ren Robin Jia
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
{qinyuany, harveyfu, xiangren, robinjia}@usc.edu
Abstract
We investigate the predictability of large lan-
guage model (LLM) capabilities: given records
of past experiments using different model fam-
ilies, numbers of parameters, tasks, and num-
bers of in-context examples, can we accurately
predict LLM performance on new experiment
configurations? Answering this question has
practical implications for LLM users (e.g., de-
ciding which models to try), developers ( e.g.,
prioritizing evaluation on representative tasks),
and the research community (e.g., identifying
hard-to-predict capabilities that warrant further
investigation).
We study the performance prediction problem
on experiment records from BIG-bench. On
a random train-test split, an MLP-based pre-
dictor achieves an R2 score greater than 95%,
indicating the presence of learnable patterns
within the experiment records. We then formu-
late the problem of searching for “small-bench,”
an informative subset of BIG-bench tasks from
which the performance on the full set can be
maximally recovered. We find a subset as infor-
mative as BIG-bench Hard for evaluating new
model families, while being 3× smaller. Addi-
tionally, we find competitive subsets by cluster-
ing task representations learned by our MLP-
based predictor and selecting tasks close to clus-
ter centroids, highlighting the importance of
task diversity in constructing “small-bench.”1
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have revolution-
ized natural language processing (NLP) research.
Typically, when researchers introduce a new set of
LLMs, they release them in various sizes and con-
duct extensive evaluation on different tasks, while
also considering different experiment configura-
tions, such as prompting strategies and the number
of in-context examples (Black et al., 2021; Zhang
1Code can be found at https://github.com/INK-USC/
predicting-big-bench.
Model Family # param Task # shot
Perf.
?
elementary_math
code_line_desc
strategy_qa
3
2
0
GPT-3
3B
0.48
BIG-G 
T=1
8B
0.19
PaLM
64B
0.23
GPT-3
elementary_math
6B
1
How 
predictable
 
are 
LLM 
capabilities?
Train
BIG-G 
T=1
PaLM
GPT-3
New 
Model
Test
Task 
87
Task 
6
....................
How 
to 
evaluate 
new 
models 
within 
budget 
constraints
?
Task 214
Task 
32
BIG-bench
"small-bench"
Task 
127
Figure 1: Overview. We study the problem of (1) pre-
dicting LLM performance on new experiment configu-
rations; (2) searching for a subset of tasks which is most
informative for predicting performance on remaining
tasks when evaluating a new model family.
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023). Given the com-
binatorially large space of possible experimental
configurations, running all possible experiments
for a new set of LLMs is impractical. This begets
a critical question: to what extent can we predict
the capabilities of an LLM in a given experimental
setting?
Studying this problem helps address various
practical issues. For LLM users, a performance
prediction model could offer guidance for exper-
iment design and decision-making by answering
questions such as, “What model scale and how
many shots are necessary to attain satisfactory per-
formance for my task?” For LLM developers and
the research community, a performance prediction
model could lead to insights into LLM capabili-
ties by identifying which capabilities are hard-to-
predict and require further investigation, and which
capabilities are highly correlated and may be depri-
oritized during evaluation to save budget.
arXiv:2305.14947v2  [cs.CL]  31 Oct 2023


===== PAGE 2 =====
We investigate the predictability of LLM capa-
bilities on the BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2023)
evaluation suite, as it includes a vast collection of
experiment records. BIG-bench is a collaborative
initiative aimed at “prob[ing] large language mod-
els and extrapolat[ing] their future capabilities.” It
has extensively evaluated various state-of-the-art
LLMs on a diverse set of tasks contributed by the
community. We gather and carefully filter these
records, yielding a total of 56k+ records which we
use as the “dataset” for our analysis.
We first formulate the problem of performance
prediction given experiment configurations such as
model family, model scale, task, and the number
of in-context examples used. We compare various
matrix completion, tree-based, and neural network
methods in a random train-test split scenario (§3).
Further, we design and experiment with various
data splits, representing different types of general-
ization challenges, to simulate practical situations
researchers may face (§4).
We then consider the problem of searching for
“small-bench,” a compact and informative subset of
BIG-bench. This subset should allow for maximum
recovery of performance on the complete BIG-
bench, enabling efficient evaluation of new LLMs
while maintaining evaluation generality. We formu-
late this as a subset search problem (§5) and empir-
ically compare various search methods, clustering-
based subset construction methods, along with
widely-adopted subsets such as BIG-bench Lite
and BIG-bench Hard (Suzgun et al., 2023).
Our key findings are summarized as follow:
1. LLMs’ performance on BIG-bench follows pre-
dictable patterns. In the default random train-test
split scenario, our best predictor, an MLP model,
achieves an RMSE lower than 0.05 (i.e., on av-
erage mis-predict by < 0.05 when the range is
[0, 1]) and an R2 greater than 95% (i.e., explains
more than 95% variance in the target variable).
2. The predictor’s performance is dependent on the
assumptions of the train-test distribution. In a
more challenging setting where we hold out the
Cartesian product of complete model families
(all model scales) and complete tasks (all num-
bers of shots), the predictor’s performance de-
creases (R2 : 95% → 86%).
3. Performance of emergent tasks (Wei et al.,
2022a) is not entirely unpredictable. In gen-
eral, performance of emergent tasks is harder
to predict than that of non-emergent tasks. In
specific scenarios (e.g., when a related emergent
task is present in the training set) our model can
accurately predict emergent abilities.
4. BIG-bench Lite and BIG-bench Hard (Suzgun
et al., 2023), two subsets of BIG-bench com-
monly used for evaluating new models, are sub-
optimal if the goal is to recover the performance
on remaining tasks. We are able to find a subset
that is as informative as BIG-bench Hard while
being 3× smaller by using randomized search.
5. Task diversity and task value are critical factors
in constructing “small-bench.” By clustering
task representations learned by the MLP-based
predictor and selecting tasks close to cluster cen-
troids, we obtain competitive “small-bench” can-
didates. This strategy is further improved by
incorporating task value information.
2 Related Work
Scaling Laws and Emergent Abilities. Pre-
training scale is critical to language model capa-
bilities. Research on scaling laws (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Rae et al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2022) aims
to categorize the relationship between pre-training
compute, corpus size, model size and the test log-
likelihood loss. Our work can be loosely consid-
ered as an extension to scaling laws, with three
notable distinctions: (1) we focus on predicting
downstream task performance; (2) we use model
scale along with other experiment configuration in-
formation; (3) we mainly experiment with machine
learning methods instead of explicit power laws. In
this same vein, recent work has studied the effect
of scale in a “pre-train then fine-tune” paradigm
(Tay et al., 2022) and has explored non-monotonic
scaling laws for complex scaling behaviors (Ca-
ballero et al., 2023). Another important observa-
tion about scale is that very large language models
exhibit emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022a), which
are described as “unpredictable.” In this work we
empirically examine this claim and quantify the
prediction errors under various assumptions.
Benchmarking for LLMs. Along with the de-
velopment and scaling of LLMs, there are contin-
uing efforts to create benchmarks that assess the
capabilities of these models. One general trend for
these benchmarks is transitioning from single-task
(Bowman et al., 2015; Rajpurkar et al., 2016), to
multi-task (Wang et al., 2018, 2019), and finally
to massively multi-task (Hendrycks et al., 2021;
Srivastava et al., 2023). However, due to budget or


===== PAGE 3 =====
API constraints, models are typically evaluated on
only a subset of the full range of available bench-
marks. The selection is often made arbitrarily by
the models’ developers, making it challenging to
compare models in a fair and holistic way (see
Liang et al. 2023, Fig. 4). In response to this issue,
we study the “small-bench” problem and hope it
offers insights on efficient benchmarking of LLMs.
Performance Prediction. NLP ERF (Xia et al.,
2020) is a pilot work on performance prediction
in NLP, focusing on bilingual and cross-lingual
tasks. It demonstrates the potential of selecting an
informative subset of tasks for evaluation, which
inspired our work on searching for “small-bench.”
Ye et al. (2021) extend NLP ERF to account for
fine-grained performance measures, confidence in-
tervals and calibration. Zhu et al. (2022) study pre-
dicting a model’s downstream performance (GLUE,
Wang et al. 2018) using probing tasks performance
(SentEval, Conneau and Kiela 2018), and advocate
for incorporating probing during pre-training. Our
work aims to add to the discussion by focusing on
the performance prediction of LLMs. Given the
ongoing advancements and substantial influence of
LLMs in the field of NLP, we believe this topic is
both timely and relevant, potentially holding impli-
cations for future development of LLMs.
3 Performance Prediction on BIG-bench
3.1 Problem Definition
In this section, we focus on the problem of learning
from experiment records of large language models,
and predict the performance of an unseen combina-
tion of experiment settings.
Notations. We use L to denote the model fami-
lies in consideration (e.g., PaLM, GPT-3). We use
T to denote the diverse collection of tasks in con-
sideration (e.g., 2-digit subtraction, emoji_movie).
Formally, an experiment record is defined by the
following values:
• Model family l ∈ L
• Number of model parameters2 nparam ∈ N
• Task being evaluated on t ∈ T
• Number of in-context examples nshot ∈ N
2Here we use nparam as the general representation of
model scale. It is important to acknowledge a limitation:
nparam does not provide a comprehensive description of
model scale. Pre-training compute and corpus size should
be included should such information be available.
• Normalized performance3 y ∈ [0, 1]
Our goal is to learn a regression model f that pre-
dicts ˆy based on (l, nparam, t, nshot).
Data Splits. We obtain a large set of experiment
records D = {(l, nparam, t, nshot, y)} and split
them into three non-overlapping subsets, Dtrain,
Ddev, Dtest. By default, we use random splitting
and adopt 10-fold cross validation.4 In subsequent
sections of this paper, we also use other splitting
strategies for controlled analysis (§3.4 and §4).
Evaluation. We report root mean square error
(RMSE) and coefficient of determination score
(R2) on the test set Dtest. RMSE is defined asq
1
n
Pn
i=1(ˆy − y)2. R2 score characterizes the
proportion of variance explained by the model, i.e.,
R2 = Explained Variance
Total Variance = 1 −
Pn
i=1(ˆy − y)2
Pn
i=1(¯y − y)2
where ¯y = 1
n
nX
i=1
y
In the main paper, we focus on RMSE and R2
scores as they are widely accepted evaluation met-
rics for regression problems. In Appendix C.1 we
introduce two alternative metrics based on rank
correlation and discuss our findings.
3.2 Data
We construct our dataset D from the BIG-bench
repository.5 We design a series of filtering crite-
ria (e.g., excluding tasks where all models have
0 accuracy, excluding tasks with <100 examples),
which are detailed in Appendix A. After filtering,
our dataset has 56,143 experiment records. We list
high-level statistics about this dataset in Table 1.
We would like to highlight that this dataset cov-
ers diverse tasks and models. According to Sri-
vastava et al. (2023), tasks in BIG-bench cover
“problems from linguistics, childhood development,
math, common-sense reasoning, biology, physics,
social bias, software development, and beyond.”
We refer the readers to Fig. 3 and Table App. 3
in Srivastava et al. (2023) for an overview. We
also made our best effort to incorporate all avail-
able model families in BIG-bench. The six model
3For tasks metrics in a different range, e.g., [0, 100], we
normalize the score to be in [0, 1] for consistency.
4More specifically, we first splitD into 10 disjoint subsets,
and then rotate on which ones are Ddev and Dtest.
5https://github.com/google/BIG-bench/


===== PAGE 4 =====
# Experiment Records 56,143
# Model Families 6
BIG-G T=0, BIG-G T=1,
BIG-G Sparse, PaLM
GPT-3, Gopher
# Models† 51
# BIG-bench Tasks 134
# BIG-bench Subtasks‡ 313
{nshot} { 0,1,2,3,5}
Table 1: Statistics of BIG-bench experiment records
after filtering. †“Model” is defined by model family
l and nparam, e.g., PaLM 535B. ‡The 313 subtasks
fall into the 134 tasks. For simplicity we disregard the
task-subtask hierarchy in this study. In the remaining of
this paper, “tasks” refers to BIG-bench subtasks.
families included are representative, and offer con-
siderable diversity. We provide a brief summary of
these model families (release date, company, model
architecture choices, etc.) in Table 2.
3.3 Compared Models
Matrix Completion. Our problem is analogous
to recommender systems or 2D matrix completion,
if “models” (described by l and nparam) are con-
sidered as “users,” and “n-shot tasks” (described
by t and nshot) are considered as “items.” Each
n-shot task (item i) is “rated” by each model (user
u). With such adaptation, we consider the follow-
ing matrix completion methods: (a) Model + Task
Baseline: ˆy = µ+bu +bi, where µ is the global av-
erage performance, bu represents the effect brought
by user u, and bi represents the effect brought by
item i. These parameters are learned by minimiz-
ing mean square error on Dtrain. (b) Adapted
SVD: ˆy = µ + bu + bi + q⊤
u pi. Compared to (a),
an additional vector qu is learned for each user u,
and pi for each item i. The term q⊤
u pi is expected
to model the interaction between user u and item i.
(c) Model-model kNN: First find the top k models
most similar to u, then aggregate the performance
of these k models on item i by using weighted
averaging. (d) Task-task kNN: similar to model-
model kNN, but finds similar tasks and aggregate
performance on these tasks instead.
Trees. We use two common tree-based methods
that can directly learn to make predictions ˆy from
the input (l, nparam, t, nshot): (e) Random Forest
(Breiman, 2001) and (f) Gradient Boosted Trees
(Friedman, 2001; Chen and Guestrin, 2016).
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Test R2
Model+T ask Baseline
Adapted SVD
Model-model kNN
T ask-task kNN
Random Forest
Gradient Boosted Trees
MLP
0.7068
0.8082
0.8999
0.9048
0.9397
0.9510
0.9508
Matrix Completion Trees Neural Networks
Figure 2: Model Comparison for Performance Predic-
tion using Default Data Split. Gradient boosted trees
and MLP achieve strong performance (RMSE < 0.05
and R2 > 0.95).
Neural Networks. We train simple (g) multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) models to predict ˆy from
the input (l, nparam, t, nshot). Hyperparameters
such as number of layers and hidden dimensions
are determined based on Ddev performance.
Featurization and Hyperparameters. Featur-
ization for trees and MLPs are explained in Ap-
pendix B. Hyperparameters and training details of
these methods are discussed in Appendix D.1.
3.4 Results and Analysis
Trees and MLPs achieve strong performance.
We experiment with the prediction models men-
tioned above and present their performance in
Fig. 2. (1) Tree-based methods and MLP outper-
forms matrix completion methods by a large mar-
gin. We hypothesize that the 2D user-item simplifi-
cation may cause loss of information on the input
space. For example, the value of nparam is merely
used to distinguish different “users,” and does not
contribute to the computation of ˆy directly. (2)
Gradient boosted trees and MLP are the strongest
among all compared models; both achieving RMSE
< 0.05 (i.e., on average mis-predict by< 0.05) and
R2 > 0.95 (i.e., more than 95% of variance in y
is explained). This suggests that learnable patterns
exist in LLM experiment records—LLM perfor-
mance on unseen configurations can be predicted
to a considerable extent in the current setting.
Performance varies on different test groups
(Fig. 3 ). To have a more fine-grained under-
standing of the predictions, we group Dtest ex-
amples according to the features such as nshot,
nparam, and model family l, and then compute


===== PAGE 5 =====
R2 on each of these test groups.6 We use the MLP
model predictions and present the results in Fig. 3
using dark blue bars ( ). In terms of nshot, we
find that it is harder to predict zero-shot perfor-
mance than 2- or 3-shot performance. In terms of
the model family l, we believe the three BIG-G
models (T=0, T=1, sparse) are easier to predict be-
cause their pre-training pipelines are similar. For
nparam, we group all models into four buckets. For
example, bucket 1 contains the smallest 25% mod-
els. We observe a trend that performance of larger
models are harder to predict.
We also group Dtest according to whether the
task t is an emergent task (see Appendix E in Wei
et al. 2022a). Our predictor achieves an R2 score
of 0.94 on the emergent group and 0.95 on the non-
emergent group. This suggests in general emergent
abilities are indeed harder to predict.
Multi-group training is helpful (Fig. 3, / ↔ ).
We further conduct a set of controlled experiments
by only training on examples from the test group
of interest ( e.g., examples with nshot = 0 ). We
name them as single-group experiments ( / ), as
opposed to multi-group experiments ( ) done in
previous sections where the predictor is trained on
all groups. Notably, in all settings, multi-group R2
is always larger than single-group R2. There are
limited observations of Gopher models in the train-
ing set, and they benefit from multi-group learning
significantly (R2 increases from 0.74 to 0.87). This
reaffirms the claim that LLM performance exhibits
shared patterns across various settings.
Some groups benefit more from multi-group
training, some are intrinsically harder to predict.
(Fig. 3, ↔ / ↔ ) Our controlled experi-
ments also allow us to distinguish between two fac-
tors: the group is intrinsically harder to predict or
the group benefits more from multi-group learning.
In Fig. 3(a), results suggest that nshot = 0 group
is not necessarily harder to predict than nshot = 2
and nshot = 3 on its own (indicated by / bars),
but the latter two benefit more from multi-group
learning. Typically, when evaluating LLMs on a
task, there is a huge performance boost when going
from zero-shot to one-shot, and the performance
improves more stably when more shots become
available. It is easier to predict 3-shot performance
when given 0,1,2-shot performance, than to predict
6Note that the denominator in R2, total variance, will be
different for each group.
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
3
2
1
0
(a) Group by nshot
Trained on ...
Single-group (1000 Examples)
Single-group (All Examples)
Multi-group (All Examples)
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
PaLM
Gopher
GPT-3
BIG-G sparse
BIG-G T=1
BIG-G T=0
(b) Group by Model Family l
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Test R2 in Each Group
Bucket 4
Bucket 3
Bucket 2
Bucket 1
(Largest)
(Smallest)
(c) Group by nparam (4 Buckets)
Figure 3: R2 Score when Grouped with nshot, l, and
nparam. Example: Multi-group nshot = 0 means
training on the complete Dtrain (containing all nshot
values) and evaluate onnshot = 0 examples in Dtest.
Single-group (1000 Examples) nshot = 0 means using
1000 nshot = 0 examples in Dtrain as the training data.
0-shot performance when given 1,2,3-shot perfor-
mance. This partly explains why the 0-shot group
does not benefit much from multi-group training.
In Fig. 3(b), BIG-G T=0 and BIG-G T=1 benefit
from multi-group learning more than the GPT-3
model family, resulting in higher R2 scores in the
multi-group setting. In Fig. 3(c), we observe that
larger models tend to be intrinsically more challeng-
ing to predict. This observation is more significant
when the single-group training set size is controlled
to be 1000 (represented by bars), where we ob-
serve a clear trend that groups consisting of larger
models achieve lower R2 score.
Identifying most/least “predictable” tasks. We
further experiment with grouping test examples ac-


===== PAGE 6 =====
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
ma:three_digit_subtraction_control
qa_wikidata
lm:sentence_negation_json
ma:two_digit_multiplication_control
ma:three_digit_addition_control
0.9785
0.9802
0.9805
0.9818
0.9885
5 Tasks with Highest R2
400
 200
 0
authorship_verification:swapped
paragraph_segmentation
gender_inclusive_sentences_german
checkmate_in_one
linguistics_puzzles
-1.8346
-5.9370
-12.1233
-38.2871
-410.7146
5 Tasks with Lowest R2
Figure 4: 5 Most and Least “Predictable” Tasks
Based on R2 Score. ma stands for “modi-
fied_arithmetic”, lm stands for “linguistic_mapping”.
Fig. 9 and 10 illustrate their scaling behaviors.
cording to the task t they belong to, to identify the
most and least predictable tasks. The five most
predictable tasks (Fig. 4 Top) include qa_wikidata
and linguistic_mappings, which were tasks marked
as having high linearity7 in their scaling behavior
(Srivastava et al. 2023, Sec 3.4). This observation
is reasonable because high linearity typically im-
plies predictability. However, modified_arithmetic,
a task marked as having high breakthroughness
(Srivastava et al., 2023) and emergence (Wei et al.,
2022a), is considered highly predictable in our set-
ting. Our hypothesis is that the predictor is able
to infer this by learning from experiment records
with similar configurations: If breakthroughness
is observed with other models or other number of
shots, the trained predictor is able to infer the trend
for a new experiment configuration. We believe it
is still challenging to predict breakthroughness/e-
mergence in more restricted setting, e.g., based on
task meta-data or input text alone.
For the five tasks with lowestR2 scores (Fig. 4
Bottom), we manually examined their scaling be-
havior (Fig. 10) and indeed find these curves to be
surprising. For future work, it will be interesting to
investigate the underlying reasons, and to identify
common characteristics shared among these tasks.
4 Creating Challenging Train-Test Splits
Previously, we randomly split D into Dtrain,
Ddev, and Dtest, i.e., we randomly sampled
7Linearity measures “the extent to which performance
improves reliably with scale;” Breakthroughness measures
“the extent to which a model is able to learn a task only once
the model grows beyond a critical scale.” See Srivastava et al.
(2023) Appendix B for the formal definition.
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Test R2
L3 Composition
test × test
L3
(l, t)
L2.2
(l, t, nshot)
L2.1
(l, nparam, t)
L1
(l, nparam, t, nshot)
Model + T ask Baseline
T ask-task kNN
Gradient Boosted Trees
MLP
Figure 5: Performance of Different Prediction Mod-
els on Challenging Train-Test Splits. As the setting
becomes more challenging (L1 → L2 → L3 → L3 Com-
position), performance gradually drops and variance in-
creases. MLP is least sensitive to these changes.
(l, nparam, t, nshot) combinations. This is a rela-
tively easy setting; for example, when the model
family l, number of parameters nparam, and task t
are kept the same, it may be easy for a model to pre-
dict performance of nshot = 2 when the records of
nshot = 1 and nshot = 3 appear in Dtrain. A more
challenging data split would ensure that the com-
binations of (l, nparam, t) in the test set are com-
pletely unseen in Dtrain, and the model is required
to predict for all possible nshot values. Taking it a
step further, one may want make predictions on an
unseen configuration of(l, t) for all possible values
of nparam and nshot.
4.1 Train-Test Split Settings
To simulate these use cases, we design and com-
pare model performance on three additional set-
tings (L2.1, L2.2, L3).
• L1: Random (l, nparam, t, nshot), used in §3
• L2.1: Group by (l, nparam, t)
• L2.2: Group by (l, t, nshot)
• L3: Group by (l, t)
For example, in L3, we first group all experiment
records in D according to (l, t), then create Dtrain,
Ddev, and Dtest by random splitting the groups.


===== PAGE 7 =====
Additionally, we make L3 setting even more
challenging by holding out one entire subset of
Ltest × Ttest. Specifically, we first select Ltest, a
subset of model families ⊆ L , and Ttest, a sub-
set of tasks ⊆ T . After this, Dtest is defined as
{(l, nparam, t, nshot, y)|l ∈ L test, t ∈ T test}. This
corresponds to a practical scenario where a new
model family is developed, and researchers want
to take a “sneak peek” at the full picture of its
capabilities—evaluate on a subset of tasks (i.e.,
Ttrain = T \Ttest), and predict the model’s perfor-
mance on the remaining tasks (i.e., Ttest). We refer
to this as the “L3 Composition” setting.8
4.2 Results and Analysis
Main Results. Results on four representative
models in these settings are visualized in Fig. 5.
We observe that as the settings becomes more chal-
lenging (L1 → L2 → L3 → L3 Composition), per-
formance gradually decreases and the standard de-
viation increases. Another important observation
is that though MLP and gradient boosted trees are
comparable in the L1 setting, MLPs are less sen-
sitive to the increased difficulty (performance de-
crease is smaller and standard deviation is smaller).
Sample Prediction Results in L3. In Fig. 7 we
visualize predictions on four sample (l, t) combi-
nations by the MLP model—two achieving high
R2 scores and two achieving low R2 scores. We
have two high-level observations: (1) Predictions
are more accurate on (l, t) combinations which has
observations on similar tasks t′ or similar models
families l′ in Dtrain. (2) Over-estimation is a com-
mon type of mistake made by our trained prediction
models. We observe several cases of “false posi-
tives” of emergent abilities. Due to space limit, we
defer more discussion in §C.2.
5 Searching for “small-bench”
There has been a recent emphasis on assessing
the generality of large language models, which in-
volves evaluating these models on numerous tasks
and scenarios. However, it will be extremely ex-
pensive to conduct all these experiments every time
a new model is developed in the future. Extend-
ing from the holding out Ltest × T test setting in
§4.1, in this section, we formulate and study the
problem of searching for “small-bench:” Can we
find a subset of BIG-bench tasks, such that when
8In §D.2, we describe our efforts to ensure that the perfor-
mance is as comparable as possible across settings.
a new model family is evaluated on it, the per-
formance of the remaining tasks can be maximally
recovered? In the following we give a formal defini-
tion of this problem (§5.1), construct “small-bench”
candidates using different search algorithms and
strategies (§5.2), and present our findings (§5.3).
5.1 Problem Definition
Our goal is to find Ttrain, a subset of all tasks T ,
that are selected and used for evaluating new model
families Ltest. We use b to represent the evaluation
budget, i.e., |Ttrain| = b. We use Ttest = T \Ttrain
to denote the tasks whose performance we wish to
recover. The problem of finding the optimal T (b)∗
train
can be formulated as the following:
arg max
Ttrain
R2(Ttest × Ltest)
s.t. Ttrain ⊆ T , |Ttrain| = b
R2(Ttest×Ltest) represents the R2 score on Ttest×
Ltest when a predictor is trained on the remaining
experiment records, as previously done in §4.
Evaluation. Ideally the optimal Ttrain should al-
low us to predict the performance ofany new model
family, without overfitting to a specific held-out
model family. To evaluate this, we adopt nested
cross-validation on L during evaluation of a se-
lected Ttrain. Specifically, given that |L| = 6, we
create 6 × 5 = 30 different ways to hold out one
model family as Ldev and one model family as
Ltest. We then train 30 prediction models and re-
port the average of 30 R2(Ttest × Ltest) scores.
5.2 Compared Methods
We consider different evaluation budget b ∈
{4, 8, 16, 24, 32, 42}. We compare the following
methods for selecting Ttrain.
Baselines. (a) BIG-bench Lite (Srivastava et al.,
2023): A subset of BIG-bench for cheaper evalu-
ation, proposed in the original BIG-bench paper.
|Ttrain| = 42 for BIG-bench Lite.9 (b) BIG-bench
Hard (Suzgun et al., 2023): A subset of BIG-
bench containing challenging tasks that cannot be
solved with direct in-context learning but can be
improved with chain-of-thought prompting (Wei
et al., 2022b). |Ttrain| = 24 for BIG-bench Hard.
(c) Random: For each b, randomly sample 5 Ttrain
9Tasks in BIG-bench Lite/Hard are listed in Appendix G.
To the best of our knowledge, the selection process for BIG-
bench Lite is not disclosed.


===== PAGE 8 =====
such that |Ttrain| = b. We report the mean and
standard deviation of these 5 runs.
Search Algorithms. (d) Greedy Search : Based
on the search result T (b−1)
train at budget b −1, enumer-
ate all tasks not present in T (b−1)
train , and select the
one task that achieves the highest R2(T (b)
test × Ltest)
to form the T (b)
train at budget b. (e) Best of 5000 :
For each b, randomly select 5000 Ttrain and select
the one achieving the highest R2(Ldev × Ttest).
Note that these search algorithms optimize
R2(Ttest × L dev) during search, to ensure that
Ttest × Ltest is held-out for evaluation. Addition-
ally, to make the search computationally tractable,
we only use 1 fixed fold from the 30 folds during
search. We discuss the impact of these experimen-
tal decisions in Appendix C.5.
Clustering-based. We hypothesize that a good
“small-bench” should be diverse (covering the task
space comprehensively while avoiding redundancy
by excluding similar tasks) and representative
(each selected task providing informative insights
for recovering the performance of other tasks). To
validate this, we use the following methods to con-
struct Ttrain. (f) k-means: We extract the task
representations10 learned by our MLP models in
§3. We apply k-means clustering to these represen-
tations, group them into b clusters, and then select
the task closest to the centroid of the each cluster.
(g) k-means + Task Value:We first calculate the
task value for each task in T by aggregating their
contributions from the Best of 5000 search history.
For example, if a task is present in 20 trials out of
the 5000, its task value will be the average of the
R2 scores from those 20 trials. We then incorporate
this information into k-means clustering, by select-
ing the task closest to the centroid among tasks that
are top 25% valuable globally.
5.3 Results and Discussion
We visualize the results of all compared methods
in Fig. 6. We have the following key observations.
BIG-bench Hard and Lite are sub-optimal for
recovering performance on remaining tasks. A
8-task subset found by Best of 5000 and randomly-
sampled 16-task subsets can match the 24-task BIG-
bench Hard for this goal. We further examine the re-
10The task t is represented as an one-hot feature in the input
space. Thus, for each task, there is a vector corresponding to
each task in the first layer of the MLP. We refer to these as
“task representations.”
4 8 16 24 32 42
Size of train
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.8530-Fold R2( test × test)
BB-Lite
BB-Hard
Baselines
Random
Search Algorithms
Greedy Search
Best of 5000
Clustering-based
K-means
K-means + T ask Value
Figure 6: “Small-bench” Search Results. X-axis: size
of “small-bench” (Ttrain), i.e., number of tasks selected
for evaluating a new model family. Y-axis: R2 score
on recovering performance of remaining tasks. The
complete BIG-bench will be at (313, 1.0) in this fig-
ure. Takeaways: (1) BIG-bench Lite and Hard are
sub-optimal for recovering performance on remaining
tasks; (2) Task diversity and task value are important for
constructing effective “small-bench” candidates.
sults and find several cases where BIG-bench Hard
fails to represent the complete BIG-bench. For ex-
ample, according to full BIG-bench performance
recovered from BIG-bench Hard, BIG-G T=1 2B
is better than GPT-3 Large; however, according to
the ground-truth BIG-bench performance, GPT-3
Large is better than BIG-G T=1 2B, which is cap-
tured more accurately when a 24-task small-bench
candidate is used. See Table 3 for the details.
It is important to note that BIG-bench Hard was
not specifically designed for our goal, and thus
is not expected to be competitive in our problem.
Yet it is surprising that it underperforms randomly-
sampled subsets. As a general recommendation for
evaluating newly-developed models, we suggest
using the Ttrain subsets found by solving the op-
timization problem in §5.1. If there is a specific
evaluation goal in mind (e.g., focus on frontier, as
in the case of BIG-bench Hard), Ttrain should still
be manually selected.
Greedy search is unstable and finds sub-optimal
solutions. Search algorithms consistently out-
performs randomly sampled Ttrain sets; however,
greedy search appears to be unstable, with occa-
sional performance drops as the budget increases.
Furthermore, at b = 42, it underperforms the Best
of 5000 approach. We include additional results
on other search algorithms, including beam search


===== PAGE 9 =====
and simulated annealing, in §C.4, where we ob-
serve similar instablitiy. One possible explanation
is the complexity of the search space, where the
greedy search algorithm cannot guarantee finding
the optimal solution. The gaps between the search
objective (Ldev × Ttest in one fold) and the evalua-
tion objective (Ltest × Ttest in 30 folds) could also
contribute to this issue (§C.5).
Task diversity and task value are important fac-
tors for constructing “small-bench.” Firstly, k-
means is comparable to or surpasses Best of 5000,
despite that it is not explicitly optimized for the R2
objective. This supports the notion that diversity is
an important factor in constructing “small-bench.”
This finding also suggests that the MLP models
for performance prediction produce meaningful
task representations as a side product. Secondly,
k-means + Task Value is comparable to or out-
performs k-means, confirming that task value is
another important factor for constructing “small-
bench,” complementing the diversity aspect.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we began with the question, “How
predictable are large language model capabilities?”
and conducted a detailed case study on BIG-bench.
We first formulated the machine learning prob-
lem of predicting performance given configurations
such as model family, the number of parameters,
task, and the number of in-context learning exam-
ples. Our strongest prediction model achieves an
R2 score greater than 95%, which suggests past
LLM experiment observations can be used to pre-
dict the performance of new experiment configura-
tions. To address the problem of increasing evalua-
tion cost on massively multi-task benchmarks, we
introduced the problem of searching for an infor-
mative “small-bench.” Results suggest that popular
subsets such as BIG-bench Lite and BIG-bench
Hard are not optimal for this purpose. Instead, sub-
sets characterized by diversity and high task values
offer competitive “small-bench” candidates, high-
lighting the importance of these two factors.
In closing, while our study primarily focused on
the predictability of LLM capabilities, we hope to
initiate discussions on the following broader topics.
Rethinking LLM Evaluation. Currently, there
is a lack of consensus regarding evaluation prac-
tices for newly developed LLMs. Often times new
LLMs are evaluated on different set of selected
tasks, making it hard to compare different models
and quantify the progress in LLM development.
Moreover, task selection is often heuristic, follow-
ing past practices, or chosen arbitrarily without
principled justifications. We anticipate more active
discussion on establishing evaluation practices that
assess LLM capabilities efficiently, reliably and
rigorously, and we hope our work provides use-
ful insights towards this. Related to our efforts on
searching for “small-bench,” Perlitz et al. (2023)
investigate the impact of benchmarking options on
the trade-off between computational efficiency and
reliability, and develop Flash-HELM, an efficient
alternative to HELM (Liang et al., 2023). Vivek
et al. (2023) propose Anchor Point Selection to
select representative examples in the test set and
reduce evaluation cost at the instance-level.
Broadening observations on LLM capability
landscape. Complementary to BIG-bench, sev-
eral ongoing initiatives, such as HELM (Liang
et al., 2023), Open LLM Leaderboard 11, and
Eleuther AI LM Harness 12 are dedicated to sys-
tematically evaluating existing LLMs. Integrating
insights from these great initiatives into future work
has the potential to enhance the accuracy of LLM
performance prediction and deepen our understand-
ing of LLM capabilities. Additionally, it would be
intriguing to take into account recent advances such
as chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022b)
and instruction tuning (Sanh et al., 2022; Ouyang
et al., 2022), and systematically measure their ef-
fects on LLM capabilities.
Limitations
Limited to BIG-bench results. We choose BIG-
bench for our study due to its extensive collection
of experiment records. Though it offers consider-
able diversity in terms of tasks and models, several
limitations exist. (1) Tasks: It’s important to note
that BIG-bench tasks are sourced from the research
community and may not accurately reflect the ac-
tual distribution of tasks encountered by LLMs in
real-world scenarios. Therefore, our study has lim-
itations in terms of generalizing our conclusions
to the real-world task distribution. (2) Models:
Though we have made every effort to incorporate
as many model families as possible, there are only
11https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/
open_llm_leaderboard
12https://github.com/EleutherAI/
lm-evaluation-harness


===== PAGE 10 =====
6 model families in our experiment record dataset
derived from BIG-bench. Such scarcity introduces
instability and increases the difficulty in investigat-
ing the “small-bench” problem.
Limited to publicly-available LLM meta-data.
LLMs capabilities are dependent on many factors,
beyond the model family l and number of param-
eters nparam used in this study. Factors such as
pre-training stability, convergence, pre-train corpus
composition, etc., all play important roles. How-
ever, we often don’t have access to this information.
In this work, we assume that the input features
(l, nparam) can capture such information during
training implicitly. In the future, we believe our
method can be expanded to include additional pre-
training meta-data when they become available.
Limited to interpolation settings. Our experi-
ments mainly concentrate on interpolation settings,
where the combinations of (l, nparam, t, nshot) are
new in the test set, but each of the input element
is seen at least once in the training set. As LLMs
continue to grow in size, a very important aspect
is predicting performance of larger models in an
extrapolation setting. We present some preliminary
findings in this setting in §C.3.
Limitations in evaluation metrics. We use
RMSE and R2 as they are widely-used metrics for
regression tasks. However, both metrics have their
limitations for our problem, especially in the con-
text of conducting group-wise comparison (§3.4).
RMSE does not account for the variance in the tar-
get variable. A low RMSE value for a task may
be solely due to the fact that the task performance
is relatively insensitve to different experiment set-
tings. On the other hand, while R2 score accounts
for variance, it creates discrepancies when conduct-
ing group-wise comparison since the denominator
used to compute R2 differs for each group. To get
a more comprehensive picture of our prediction
model, we introduce task-average Pearson Correla-
tion and Kendall Rank Correlation for evaluation
and discuss our findings in Appendix C.1.
Acknowledgements
We thank anonymous reviewers and members of
USC NLP for their valuable feedback. QY and XR
were supported in part by the Office of the Director
of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via the
HIATUS Program contract #2022-22072200006,
the DARPA MCS program under Contract No.
N660011924033, the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency with award W911NF-19-20271,
NSF IIS 2048211, and gift awards from Google
and Amazon. HF was supported by a USC Provost
Fellowship Award. RJ was supported by an Open
Philanthropy research grant and a Cisco Research
Award.
References
Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy,
and Stella Biderman. 2021. GPT-Neo: Large
Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-
Tensorflow. In GPT-Neo.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Leo Breiman. 2001. Random forests. Machine learning,
45:5–32.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Ethan Caballero, Kshitij Gupta, Irina Rish, and David
Krueger. 2023. Broken neural scaling laws. In The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Vladimír ˇCern`y. 1985. Thermodynamical approach to
the traveling salesman problem: An efficient simula-
tion algorithm. Journal of optimization theory and
applications, 45:41–51.
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A
scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’16,
page 785–794, New York, NY , USA. Association for
Computing Machinery.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,


===== PAGE 11 =====
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. 2018. SentEval: An
evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
Jerome H Friedman. 2001. Greedy function approx-
imation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of
statistics, pages 1189–1232.
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Liane Lovitt,
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Con-
erly, Nova Dassarma, Dawn Drain, Nelson Elhage,
Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
Tom Henighan, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Nicholas
Joseph, Jackson Kernian, Shauna Kravec, Ben Mann,
Neel Nanda, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson,
Daniela Amodei, Tom Brown, Jared Kaplan, Sam
McCandlish, Christopher Olah, Dario Amodei, and
Jack Clark. 2022. Predictability and surprise in large
generative models. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fair-
ness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’22,
page 1747–1764, New York, NY , USA. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou,
Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
2021. Measuring massive multitask language under-
standing. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Men-
sch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Ruther-
ford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. 2022. Train-
ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.15556.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.08361.
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris
Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Ku-
mar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby Yan,
Ce Zhang, Christian Alexander Cosgrove, Christo-
pher D Manning, Christopher Re, Diana Acosta-
Navas, Drew Arad Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin
Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren,
Huaxiu Yao, Jue W ANG, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel
Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun,
Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar
Khattab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan An-
drew Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar,
Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard,
Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang,
Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Ko-
reeda. 2023. Holistic evaluation of language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Fea-
tured Certification, Expert Certification.
Nelson F. Liu, Tony Lee, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang.
2023. Do question answering modeling improve-
ments hold across benchmarks? In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 13186–13218, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 27730–27744.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Yotam Perlitz, Elron Bandel, Ariel Gera, Ofir Arviv,
Liat Ein-Dor, Eyal Shnarch, Noam Slonim, Michal
Shmueli-Scheuer, and Leshem Choshen. 2023. Ef-
ficient benchmarking (of language models). arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.11696.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie
Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susan-
nah Young, et al. 2021. Scaling language models:
Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen
Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey,
M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon
Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti
Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han
Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong,
Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Tr-
ishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, An-
drea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan
Teehan, Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao,
Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. 2022. Multi-
task prompted training enables zero-shot task gener-
alization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao,
Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch,
Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta,
Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska, Aitor


===== PAGE 12 =====
Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex
Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Kocurek, Ali
Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish,
Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda Askell, Amanda
Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anan-
tharaman S. Iyer, Anders Johan Andreassen, An-
drea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller,
Andrew M. Dai, Andrew La, Andrew Lampinen,
Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh
Vuong, Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio
Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi,
Arfa Tabassum, Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubara-
jan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin
Herrick, Avia Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karaka¸ s,
B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph,
Bartłomiej Bojanowski, Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam
Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden,
Benno Stein, Berk Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake
Howald, Bryan Orinion, Cameron Diao, Cameron
Dour, Catherine Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, Cesar
Ferri, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin
Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-
Burch, Christopher Waites, Christian V oigt, Christo-
pher D Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez,
Clara E. Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Court-
ney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo,
Dan Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan
Roth, C. Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel
Levy, Daniel Moseguí González, Danielle Perszyk,
Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito,
Dar Gilboa, David Dohan, David Drakard, David Ju-
rgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin,
Denis Kleyko, Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek
Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan,
Dimitri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee,
Dylan Schrader, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus
Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth
Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele
Rodolà, Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut
Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A Chi, Ethan Dyer,
Ethan Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi,
Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar,
Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Francesca Happé, Fran-
cois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta In-
dra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski,
Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio Mariani, Glo-
ria Xinyue Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-Lopez, Gregor
Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic, Hannah Kim,
Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta,
Hayden Bogar, Henry Francis Anthony Shevlin, Hin-
rich Schuetze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang,
Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet,
Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jae-
hoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, James B Simon,
James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocon,
Jana Thompson, Janelle Wingfield, Jared Kaplan,
Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang,
Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle
Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal,
Jesse Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming
Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden, John
Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Batchelder, Jonathan
Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, Jose Hernandez-
Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Guerr, Joseph
Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce
Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth,
Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja
Markert, Kaustubh Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin
Omondi, Kory Wallace Mathewson, Kristen Chia-
fullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle Mc-
Donell, Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao,
Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-
Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella,
Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng
He, Luis Oliveros-Colón, Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem
Senel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap, Maartje Ter
Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas
Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco
Maru, Maria Jose Ramirez-Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn,
Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast,
Matthew L Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schu-
bert, Medina Orduna Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud,
Melvin McElrath, Michael Andrew Yee, Michael Co-
hen, Michael Gu, Michael Ivanitskiy, Michael Star-
ritt, Michael Strube, Michał Sw˛ edrowski, Michele
Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike
Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker,
Mo Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor
Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun
Peng, Nathan Andrew Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-
Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts,
Nick Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas
Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel,
Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar El-
baghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Anto-
nio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung,
Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi,
Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter W Chang, Pe-
ter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr
Miłkowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti
Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Ra-
bin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel,
Rahel Habacker, Ramon Risco, Raphaël Millière,
Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku
Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Ro-
han Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ro-
nan Le Bras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui
Zhang, Russ Salakhutdinov, Ryan Andrew Chi,
Seungjae Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan,
Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad,
Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam
Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman,
Samuel Stern Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev
Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan
Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian
Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava,
Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixi-
ang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Tosh-
niwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima Shammie
Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Si-
mone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini,
Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar,
Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon,
Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad,


===== PAGE 13 =====
Steven Piantadosi, Stuart Shieber, Summer Mish-
erghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal
Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali,
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbor-
des, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas Phan, Tianle
Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Ko-
rnev, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton
Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler Shultz,
Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera Demberg, Victo-
ria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Venkatesh Ra-
masesh, vinay uday prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar,
Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders,
William Zhang, Wout V ossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu
Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadol-
lah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song,
Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding
Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yu-
fang Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao,
Zijian Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi
Wu. 2023. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying
and extrapolating the capabilities of language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Se-
bastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny
Zhou, and Jason Wei. 2023. Challenging BIG-bench
tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL 2023 , pages 13003–13051, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Jinfeng Rao, William Fedus,
Samira Abnar, Hyung Won Chung, Sharan Narang,
Dani Yogatama, Ashish Vaswani, and Donald Met-
zler. 2022. Scale efficiently: Insights from pretrain-
ing and finetuning transformers. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro,
Faisal Azhar, et al. 2023. Llama: Open and effi-
cient foundation language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971.
Rajan Vivek, Kawin Ethayarajh, Diyi Yang, and Douwe
Kiela. 2023. Anchor points: Benchmarking mod-
els with much fewer examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.08638.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Aman-
preet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy,
and Samuel Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A stickier
benchmark for general-purpose language understand-
ing systems. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for nat-
ural language understanding. In Proceedings of the
2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages
353–355, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022a. Emer-
gent abilities of large language models. Transactions
on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certifica-
tion.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022b. Chain of thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Mengzhou Xia, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Ruochen Xu,
Yiming Yang, and Graham Neubig. 2020. Predicting
performance for natural language processing tasks.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 8625–
8646, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Zihuiwen Ye, Pengfei Liu, Jinlan Fu, and Graham Neu-
big. 2021. Towards more fine-grained and reliable
NLP performance prediction. In Proceedings of the
16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Main V olume,
pages 3703–3714, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel
Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher De-
wan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. 2022.
Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068.
Zining Zhu, Soroosh Shahtalebi, and Frank Rudzicz.
2022. Predicting fine-tuning performance with prob-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 11534–11547, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emi-
rates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
A Filtering BIG-bench Records
We use the following criteria when filtering the
records. After filtering we obtain a dataset with
56k+ records which is described in Table 1. For
now we limit the scope to predicting performance
on the preferred evaluation metric.
1. Keep json tasks and remove programmatic
tasks.
2. Remove T0/T5 models because there are only
14 records for each of these two. Keep BIG-G,
PaLM, GPT-3, Gopher models.


===== PAGE 14 =====
3. Remove BIG-bench subtasks whose perfor-
mance on the preferred metric is zero for all
models.
4. Keep experiments whose preferred
metric is in exact_str_match,
multiple_choice_grade, rougeLsum.
This keeps 93% of all records before this step.
5. Remove entries of aggregating results from
multiple subtasks as the performance of a task.
6. Remove subtasks with less than 100 examples
because small sample size may lead to large
variance during evaluation
We present a summary of the 6 model families in
these records in Table 2.
B Featurization
In the main body of the paper we use the abstrac-
tion of (l, nparam, t, nshot) to describe experiment
configurations. In the actual training of tree-based
models and MLP, we modify how these features
are represented. In particular, the input features
contain the following:
1. l is converted as binary features for each
model family, e.g., is_PaLM.
2. (l, nparam) is converted as binary features for
each model, e.g., is_PaLM_535B.
3. There are 6 numerical features for the num-
ber of parameters: number of total parame-
ters, number of non-embedding parameters,
number of FLOP-matched non-embedding pa-
rameters; and the natural log of these three
values.
4. t is converted as binary features for each task,
e.g., is_code_line_description.
5. m is a binary feature for the preferred
metric associated with the task t, e.g.,
is_exact_str_match. BIG-bench defines a
preferred metric for each task, so in the ab-
straction it is covered by t.
6. nshot is directly used as an input feature.
For numerical features (6 features for the num-
ber of parameters and 1 feature for the num-
ber of shots), we use StandardScaler in the
sklearn libarary to normalize them. Addition-
ally, we normalize the performance value y to
be in the range of [0, 1]. exact_str_match and
multiple_choice_grade already satisfy this con-
straint. The reported rougeLsum values are in the
range of [0, 100] and are multiplied by0.01 to form
our dataset.
C Extended Experiment Details and
Results
C.1 Additional Evaluation Metrics for
Performance Prediction
In addition to RMSE and R2 score, two common
metrics for evaluating regression models, we in-
troduce two new metrics, Task-average Pearson
Correlation and Task-average Kendall Rank Cor-
relation. The usage of Pearson Correlation and
Kendall Rank Correlation are inspired by Liu et al.
(2023) and we further adapt them to be averaging
across tasks.
Concretely, we first group the test set Dtest into
|T | groups, based on the associated task t of each
example. Within each group, we compute the Pear-
son Correlation or Kendall Rank Correlation be-
tween the predicted performance and the actual
performance. Finally, the average of these rank cor-
relation values across all tasksT is then reported as
the task-average rank correlation. We report these
numbers along with RMSE and R2 in Table 6.
Generally, prediction models with higher R2
scores exhibit higher rank correlation. Exceptions
emerge when closely comparing tree-based models
and MLP models. While MLP models are compara-
ble or outperform tree-based models in terms ofR2
score, tree-based models tend to outperform MLP
models in terms of task-avg (rank) correlation. Our
further investigation reveals that tree-based models
make more errors with large absolute errors, which
are penalized heavily by RMSE and R2 (involv-
ing taking square of these errors), whereas rank
correlation is less sensitive to such errors.
Throughout our paper, we primarily focus on ex-
perimentation with MLP models due to their faster
runtime and the values of the learned representa-
tions in MLP. In practice, we recommend selecting
methods based on the final goal: MLP models for
more accurate prediction in terms of exact values;
tree-based methods for more accurate ranking of
different experiment settings.
C.2 Sample Predictions in the L3 setting
In Fig. 7 we visualize predictions on four sample
(l, t) combinations by the MLP model. The left


===== PAGE 15 =====
Model Family Company Release Date Pre-train Corpus # Parameters Architecture Choices Infrastructure
BIG-G (T=0, T=1) Google Jun 2022 2.8T tokens 2M to 137B Gated-GELU, relative attention TPUv3, GSPMDBIG-G Sparse Google Jun 2022 2.8T tokens 51M to 46B BIG-G + Mixture-of-Experts TPUv3, GSPMDPaLM Google Apr 2022 780B tokens 8B, 62B, 540B SwiGLU activation, parallel layers, etc. TPUv4, PathwayGPT-3 OpenAI May 2020 300B tokens 125M to 175B Alternating dense and sparse attention GPUsGopher DeepMind Nov 2021 300B tokens 44M to 280B RMSNorm, relative position encoding TPUv3, model parallelism, etc.
Table 2: Summary of model families included in this study. These model families offer considerable diversity.
Information in this table is aggregated from Srivastava et al. (2023); Chowdhery et al. (2022); Brown et al. (2020);
Rae et al. (2021)
BIG-G T=1 2B Wins Tie GPT-3 Large WinsConclusion
Performance Recovered from BBH (24 subtasks)20.1% 70.1% 9.8% BIG-G T=1 2B is betterPerformance Recovered from small-bench (24 subtasks)19.1% 56.3% 24.6% GPT-3 Large is better
Ground-truth full BIG-bench Performance14.3% 55.3% 30.4% GPT-3 Large is better
Table 3: Using BIG-bench Hard and “small-bench” to recover performance and compare models. In this
example, BBH is less informative in recovering performance on remaining tasks, and thus is the comparison is less
accurate.
two are cases achieving high R2 scores. The right
two are cases achieving low R2 scores.
For (l, t) combinations achieving highR2 scores,
our observation is that either a combination (l, t′)
exists in Dtrain such that t and t′ are similar (e.g., t
and t′ are two sub-tasks from the same BIG-bench
task), or (l′, t) exists in Dtrain such that l′ and l
are similar (e.g., both l and l′ from the three BIG-
G model families). Our interpretation is that the
learned predictor is capturing model family simi-
larities and task similarities and therefore predicts
more accurately when l or t has a similar counter-
part in the training set.
For (l, t) combinations achieving low R2 scores,
we observe several cases of overestimating perfor-
mance or predicting “false positives” of emergent
abilities. The selection of these combinations are
largely due to using R2 as selection criteria—they
have small total variance as the denominator for
R2 score, so any overestimation will results in an
extremely negative R2 score. Nevertheless, these
qualitative results suggest that overestimation is
a common type of mistake made by our trained
prediction model.
C.3 Performance Prediction in Extrapolation
Settings
In the input space of our problem,nshot and nparam
are numerical features. Thus it is possible to test
the extrapolation capabilities on these two inputs.
We create three settings for testing the model’s
extrapolation capabilities:
• E1: Dtest contains examples with nshot = 3,
Dtrain contains examples with nshot = 0, 1, 2
• E2.1: Dtest contains examples with
(l, nparam) = (GPT-3, 200B)
• E2.2: Dtest contains examples with
(l, nparam) = (PaLM, 535B)
Relaxing Constraints by leaking 10% Dtest.
Pure extrapolation may be extremely challenging.
To better contextualize the results and understand
limitations, we compare model performance in
three slightly different settings. The first setting
(S1) is holding 10% Dtrain as dev set for hyperpa-
rameter selection and early stopping. This corre-
sponds to the pure extrapolation setting, as no in-
formation about Dtest is available at training time.
The second setting (S2) is holding 10%Dtest as dev
set. Information about Dtest is indirectly leaked to
model training. The third setting is leaking 10%
Dtest during training. This third setting (S3) is
mainly for reference.
More specifically, we split the original Dtrain
into 90% D′
train and 10% Ddev1. Also we split
the original Dtest into 90% D′
test and 10% Ddev2.
In S1, model training, selection and evaluation is
done with (D′
train, Ddev1, D′
test). In S2, we al-
low model selection with Ddev2, so the experi-
ment is done with (D′
train, Ddev2, D′
test). In S3,
we leak Ddev2 (which is from the test distribution)
to training time, and the experiment is done with
(D′
train ∪ Ddev2, Ddev1, D′
test).
Results and Findings. We present the results
in Table 4. (1) Extrapolation in terms of nshot
is promising, achieving R2 which is greater than
0.9. However, extrapolation to increased model
size remains challenging. This is closely related to
the observation that emergent abilities is difficult
to predict (Ganguli et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a).


===== PAGE 16 =====
1010 1011
flop_matched_non_embedding_params
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0performance
model: PaLM
task: bbq_lite_json:
bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig
0-shot pred
0-shot true
1-shot pred
1-shot true
2-shot pred
2-shot true
5-shot pred
5-shot true
107 108 109 1010 1011
flop_matched_non_embedding_params
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5performance
model: BIG-G T=0
task: modified_arithmetic:
three_digit_addition_control
0-shot pred
0-shot true
1-shot pred
1-shot true
2-shot pred
2-shot true
3-shot pred
3-shot true
1010 1011
flop_matched_non_embedding_params
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4performance
model: PaLM
task: tense
0-shot pred
0-shot true
1-shot pred
1-shot true
2-shot pred
2-shot true
5-shot pred
5-shot true
108 109 1010 1011
flop_matched_non_embedding_params
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6performance
model: GPT
task: modified_arithmetic:
three_digit_subtraction_plus_one
0-shot pred
0-shot true
1-shot pred
1-shot true
2-shot pred
2-shot true
3-shot pred
3-shot true
Figure 7: Sample Prediction Results in L3 setting (§C.2). Left 2: (l, t) combinations achieving high R2 score;
Right 2: (l, t) combinations achieving low R2 score.
(2) Performance in S2 is consistently better than
S1. Note that the only difference between these
two setting is the Ddev used to do model selection.
This suggests that the model overfits and fails to
extrapolate well in the strict S1 setting. Leaking
some information about the test distribution (as in
S2 and S3) can greatly help improve prediction
accuracy.
C.4 Additional Results on “small-bench”
search
We experiment with two additional search algo-
rithms for “small-bench” search: (1) Randomized
Beam Search: Similar to regular beam search, ex-
cept that we maintain a beam size of q = 4 and we
enumerate 1/q randomly selected task candidates
at each timestamp. This ensures the search run-
time is equivalent to greedy search. (2) Simulated
Annealing ( ˇCern`y, 1985): Initialize with a seed
Ttrain; at time t, iteratively search in the neigh-
bourhood of the Ttrain at time t − 1 and occasion-
ally allowing uphill moves ( i.e., moving towards
a worse solution). Results are visualized in Fig. 8.
Similar to greedy search, these two search methods
face optimization challenges discussed in §5.3 and
may lead to sub-optimal solutions.
C.5 Gaps between the “small-bench” search
objective and evaluation objective
In §5.3, we observe that the performance of greedy
search is unstable and hypothesize that this is partly
due to the gaps between the search and evaluation
objective.
Gap between Tdev and Ttest. To simulate the
scenario that the prediction model is expected to
make predictions on an unseen model family, we
make sure that the search algorithm optimizes on
Tdev × Ltest, and holds out Ttest × Ltest for evalua-
tion. This creates a dev-test shift which may affect
search algorithm results.
4 8 16 24 32 42
Size of train
0.650.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.8530-Fold R2( test × test)
BB-Lite
BB-Hard
Baselines
Random
Greedy Search
Beam Search (#beam=4)
Simulated Annealing
Best of 5000
Figure 8: Additional “Small-bench” Search Results.
See §C.4 for in-depth analysis.
Gap between 1 fold and 30 folds. Due to run-
time concerns, we only launch search algorithms
on 1 fold, while at evaluation time we use all 30
folds. The 30 folds, derived from 6 distinct model
families, may exhibit significant variations. Con-
sequently, the search result on 1 fold may overfit
to that specific fold and become less optimal on all
30 folds.
D Reproducibility
D.1 Hyperparameters and Training Details
For all the following methods and for each data
split setting (L1/L2.1/L2.2/L3/L3 Composition),
we select hyperparameters based on the dev perfor-
mance on the first fold, and select the best set of
hyperparameters from 100 random combinations
from a pre-defined list.
For Random Forest, we use the implementa-
tion of RandomForestRegressor from sklearn
library. We use squared_error as optimization crite-
rion. The hyperparameter candidates are sampled


===== PAGE 17 =====
S1:Ddevis 10%Dtrain S2:Ddevis 10%Dtest S3: Leak 10%Dtest
RMSE (↓) R2(↑) RMSE (↓) R2(↑) RMSE (↓) R2(↑)
More shots
E1: Hold outnshot= 3 0.0618 0.9297 0.0587 0.9367 0.0545 0.9454
Scaling up model size
E2.1: Hold out GPT-3 200B0.1314 0.6968 0.1017 0.8187 0.0830 0.8791
E2.2: Hold out PaLM 535B0.2708 0.1535 0.1923 0.5731 0.1668 0.6789
Table 4: Results of Extrapolation Experiments (§C.3).
from the following:
1 {
2 " n_estimators " : [ 3 0 , 1 0 0 , 3 0 0 ] ,
3 " max_depth " : [ None , 1 6 , 3 2 , 6 4 , 1 2 8 ] ,
4 " m in _s am pl es_ sp li t " : [ 2 , 4 , 8 ] ,
5 " min _samples _leaf " : [ 1 , 2 , 4 ] ,
6 " max_features " : [ 1 . 0 , 0 . 9 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 7 , 0 . 6 , " sqrt "
] ,
7 " max_samples " : [ 1 . 0 , 0 . 9 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 7 , 0 . 6 ]
8 }
For Gradient Boosted Trees, we use the im-
plementation of XGBRegressor from XGBoost li-
brary (Chen and Guestrin, 2016). We use the
reg:squarederror as objective. The hyperparam-
eter candidates are sampled from the following:
1 {
2 " n_estimators " : [ 3 0 , 1 0 0 , 3 0 0 , 1 0 0 0 ] ,
3 " learning_rate " : [ 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 8 , 1 . 0 ] ,
4 " max_depth " : [ None , 1 6 , 3 2 , 6 4 , 1 2 8 ] , # None
indicates no limit
5 " gamma " : [ 0 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 ] ,
6 " subsample " : [ 0 . 6 , 0 . 7 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 9 , 1 . 0 ] ,
7 }
For MLP, we implement with Pytorch. We use
Adam optimzier and use MSELoss. The hyperpa-
rameter candidates are sampled from the following:
1 {
2 " lr " : [ 1e - 3 , 3e - 4 , 1e - 4 ] ,
3 " batch_size " : [ 3 2 , 6 4 , 1 2 8 ] ,
4 " dropout " : [ 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 5 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 1 5 , 0 . 2 ] ,
5 " hidden_dims " : [
6 ( 1 2 8 , 6 4 , 3 2 , 1 6 ) , ( 2 5 6 , 1 2 8 , 6 4 , 3 2 ) ,
7 ( 1 2 8 , 6 4 , 3 2 ) , ( 2 5 6 , 1 2 8 , 6 4 ) ,
8 ( 6 4 , 3 2 ) , ( 1 2 8 , 6 4 ) , ( 2 5 6 , 1 2 8 ) ,
9 ( 1 2 8 , ) , ( 6 4 , )
10 ] ,
11 " weight_decay " : [ 0 . 0 , 0 . 0 0 0 0 1 , 0 . 0 0 0 1 , 0 . 0 0 1 , 0 .
0 1 ] ,
12 }
D.2 Details on Cross Validation
L1: Random Splitting. We first split D into 10
disjoint subsets, and then rotate on which ones
are Ddev and Dtest. To save computation budget,
hyperparameter selection is done on the Ddev of
the first fold.
L2.1/L2.2/L3: Random Splitting at Different
Granularity. To ensure that the results are com-
parable across settings as much as possible, we use
Model Runtime (second)
Matrix+Task Baseline 4
Adapted SVD 2
Model-model kNN 2
Task-task kNN 5
Random Forest 98
Gradient Boosted Trees 242
MLP 86
MLP (optimized for search) 28
Table 5: Runtime (Training+Evaluation) of Performance
Prediction Models.
10-fold cross validation for all these settings, sim-
ilar to the practice in L1. This ensures for every
fold, the sizes of Dtrain/Ddev/Dtest are consistent
across settings, and each example in D appears in
Dtest exactly once. In this case, the only changing
variable is the data splitting strategy.
L3 Composition: Holding out Ltest × Ttest. To
align with the 10-fold setting in L1-L3 as much as
possible, we split L into 3 non-overlapping subsets,
and split T into 3 non-overlapping subsets. This
gives 3 × 3 = 9 different Dtest for cross-validation.
D.3 Hardware and Runtime
Matrix completion experiments and tree-based ex-
periments are done on a server with 56 Intel Xeon
CPU E5-2690v4 (@ 2.6 GHz). MLP experiments
are done on one NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti.
The runtime for training a model for performance
prediction is listed in Table 5. For small-bench
search, we optimized MLP training by not saving a
copy of the best checkpoint in memory, and moving
Dtrain and Ddev to GPU before training to reduce
GPU I/O. For Greedy Search, the performance pre-
diction algorithm is repeated for 12326 times, using
approximately 5 days. For Best of 5000, the per-
formance prediction algorithm is repeated for 5000
times, using approximately 2 days.
(Continued on next page)


===== PAGE 18 =====
E Full Results of Performance Prediction
RMSE R2 Score Task Avg. Pearson Task Avg. Kendall
L1 Setting: Random(l, nparam, t, nshot), 10 folds
Model+Task Baseline 0.1220 (±0.0016) 0.7068 (±0.0067) 0.5207 (±0.0078) 0.3617 (±0.0077)
Adapted SVD 0.0986 ( ±0.0014) 0.8082 (±0.0053) 0.5149 (±0.0089) 0.3443 (±0.0053)
Model-model kNN 0.0712 (±0.0016) 0.8999 (±0.0041) 0.7046 (±0.0085) 0.5133 (±0.0070)
Task-task kNN 0.0695 ( ±0.0012) 0.9048 (±0.0035) 0.7006 (±0.0091) 0.5109 (±0.0078)
Random Forest 0.0553 ( ±0.0014) 0.9397 (±0.0030) 0.8378 (±0.0062) 0.6590 (±0.0058)
Gradient Boosted Trees 0.0499 (±0.0013) 0.9510 (±0.0025) 0.8566 (±0.0085) 0.6690 (±0.0060)
MLP 0.0500 ( ±0.0009) 0.9508 (±0.0014) 0.8203 (±0.0097) 0.6128 (±0.0065)
L2.1 Setting: Random(l, nparam, t), 10 folds
Model+Task Baseline 0.1221 (±0.0042) 0.7057 (±0.0158) 0.4823 (±0.0172) 0.3629 (±0.0152)
Adapted SVD 0.1000 ( ±0.0039) 0.8026 (±0.0135) 0.4575 (±0.0115) 0.3229 (±0.0121)
Model-model kNN 0.0721 (±0.0034) 0.8974 (±0.0085) 0.6669 (±0.0118) 0.5043 (±0.0110)
Task-task kNN 0.0763 ( ±0.0031) 0.8852 (±0.0078) 0.6102 (±0.0190) 0.4548 (±0.0136)
Random Forest 0.0724 ( ±0.0034) 0.8962 (±0.0109) 0.7468 (±0.0152) 0.5830 (±0.0101)
Gradient Boosted Trees 0.0676 (±0.0029) 0.9095 (±0.0084) 0.7458 (±0.0155) 0.5759 (±0.0094)
MLP 0.0616 ( ±0.0022) 0.9251 (±0.0040) 0.7008 (±0.0163) 0.5244 (±0.0126)
L2.2 Setting: Random(l, t, nshot), 10 folds
Model+Task Baseline 0.1315 (±0.0033) 0.6577 (±0.0288) 0.4556 (±0.0327) 0.3373 (±0.0229)
Adapted SVD 0.1208 ( ±0.0042) 0.7107 (±0.0324) 0.4338 (±0.0229) 0.3095 (±0.0170)
Model-model kNN 0.0983 (±0.0062) 0.8072 (±0.0339) 0.5885 (±0.0204) 0.4287 (±0.0116)
Task-task kNN 0.0985 ( ±0.0060) 0.8079 (±0.0231) 0.6059 (±0.0181) 0.4449 (±0.0137)
Random Forest 0.0675 ( ±0.0031) 0.9098 (±0.0096) 0.7571 (±0.0144) 0.5862 (±0.0107)
Gradient Boosted Trees 0.0624 (±0.0033) 0.9229 (±0.0092) 0.7819 (±0.0116) 0.6057 (±0.0104)
MLP 0.0555 ( ±0.0019) 0.9391 (±0.0050) 0.7424 (±0.0210) 0.5520 (±0.0143)
L3 Setting: Random(l, t), 10 folds
Model+Task Baseline 0.1321 (±0.0075) 0.6542 (±0.0302) 0.4746 (±0.0288) 0.3575 (±0.0229)
Adapted SVD 0.1199 ( ±0.0088) 0.7146 (±0.0353) 0.4211 (±0.0291) 0.2979 (±0.0211)
Model-model kNN 0.1028 (±0.0130) 0.7880 (±0.0531) 0.5954 (±0.0214) 0.4345 (±0.0106)
Task-task kNN 0.1032 ( ±0.0076) 0.7878 (±0.0308) 0.5667 (±0.0242) 0.4102 (±0.0156)
Random Forest 0.1015 ( ±0.0103) 0.7940 (±0.0414) 0.6617 (±0.0234) 0.4961 (±0.0174)
Gradient Boosted Trees 0.0947 (±0.0084) 0.8212 (±0.0315) 0.6589 (±0.0302) 0.4827 (±0.0246)
MLP 0.0736 ( ±0.0064) 0.8922 (±0.0164) 0.6573 (±0.0156) 0.4680 (±0.0148)
L3 Composition Setting: Holding outLtest× Ttest, 9 folds
Model+Task Baseline 0.1383 (±0.0115) 0.6231 (±0.0265) 0.5099 (±0.0763) 0.3709 (±0.0457)
Adapted SVD 0.1318 ( ±0.0142) 0.6575 (±0.0460) 0.4720 (±0.0767) 0.3365 (±0.0541)
Model-model kNN 0.1138 (±0.0173) 0.7398 (±0.0731) 0.5342 (±0.1198) 0.3918 (±0.0956)
Task-task kNN 0.1152 ( ±0.0139) 0.7362 (±0.0530) 0.5692 (±0.0773) 0.4086 (±0.0657)
Random Forest 0.1118 ( ±0.0154) 0.7475 (±0.0782) 0.6136 (±0.0781) 0.4347 (±0.0494)
Gradient Boosted Trees 0.1072 (±0.0104) 0.7706 (±0.0451) 0.5970 (±0.0941) 0.4034 (±0.0588)
MLP 0.0843 ( ±0.0072) 0.8597 (±0.0129) 0.6228 (±0.0991) 0.4236 (±0.0675)
Table 6: Full Results of Performance Prediction. Matrix Completion Trees Neural Network


===== PAGE 19 =====
F Scaling Behavior of Most/Least “Predictable” Tasks (§3.4)
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
20
40
60
80
100exact_str_match
modified_arithmetic:three_digit_addition_control
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
(a) modified_arithmetic:
three_digit_addition_control
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
20
40
60
80exact_str_match
modified_arithmetic:two_digit_multiplication_control
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
(b) modified_arithmetic:
two_digit_multiplication_control
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
20
40
60
80
100exact_str_match
linguistic_mappings:sentence_negation_json
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
(c) linguistic_mapping:
sentence_negation_json
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
20
40
60
80rougeLsum
qa_wikidata
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
Best rater
Average rater
(d) qa_wikidata
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
20
40
60
80
100exact_str_match
modified_arithmetic:three_digit_subtraction_control
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
(e) modified_arithmetic:
three_digit_subtraction_control
Figure 9: Scaling Behavior of Tasks with Highest R2 Score. Figures are obtained from https://github.com/
google/BIG-bench


===== PAGE 20 =====
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30exact_str_match
linguistics_puzzles
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
Best rater
Average rater
(a) linguistics_puzzles
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70exact_str_match
checkmate_in_one
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
Best rater
Average rater (b) checkmate_in_one
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0exact_str_match
gender_inclusive_sentences_german
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
Best rater
Average rater
(c) gender_inclusive
_sentences_german
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8exact_str_match
paragraph_segmentation
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
GPT (0-shot)
GPT (1-shot)
GPT (2-shot)
GPT (3-shot)
Best rater
Average rater
(d) paragraph_segmentation
107
108
109
1010
1011
Effective parameter count
48.0
48.5
49.0
49.5
50.0
50.5
51.0
51.5
52.0multiple_choice_grade
authorship_verification:swapped
BIG-G (0-shot)
BIG-G (1-shot)
BIG-G (2-shot)
BIG-G (3-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (0-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (1-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (2-shot)
BIG-G T=1 (3-shot)
BIG-G sparse (0-shot)
BIG-G sparse (1-shot)
BIG-G sparse (2-shot)
BIG-G sparse (3-shot)
PaLM (0-shot)
PaLM (1-shot)
PaLM (2-shot)
PaLM (3-shot)
Random
(e) authorship_verification:
swapped
Figure 10: Scaling Behavior of Tasks with Lowest R2 Score. Figures are obtained from https://github.com/
google/BIG-bench


===== PAGE 21 =====
G “Small-bench” Search Results
G.1 BIG-bench Hard and BIG-bench Lite
The two subsets listed below slightly differ from the original subsets, because we filtered out several
subtasks as described in §A.
1 {
2 " bblite " : [ ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_age_ambig ' , ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_age_disambig ', '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l it e _ j s o n _ di s a b i l i ty _ s t a t u s_ a m b i g' , ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ d i s a b i l i t y _ s t a t u s _ d i s a m b i g', ' bbq_lite_json : bb q _l it e _j so n _g en d er _ id en t it y_ a mb ig ' , '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ g e n d e r _ i d e n t i t y _ d i s a m b i g', ' bbq_lite_json :
bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ' , ' bbq_lite_json : bb q_l it e_ js on _na ti on al it y_d is am bi g ', '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g' , ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ d i s a m b i g' , ' bbq_lite_json : bb q_l it e_ js on _ra ce _e th ni cit y_ am bi g ', '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l it e _ j s o n _ ra c e _ e t h ni c i t y _ d is a m b i g' , ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_religion_ambig ',
' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_religion_disambig ', ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_ses_ambig ' , '
bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_ses_disambig ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ a m b i g' ,
' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g' , ' code_line_description ', '
c o n c e p t u a l _ c o m b i n a t i o n s : emergent_properties', ' f or m a l_ f a ll a c ie s _ sy l l og i s ms _ n eg a t io n', '
hindu_knowledge ', ' language_identification ' , ' linguistics_puzzles ' , ' logic_grid_puzzle ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : five_objects ', ' l ogi ca l_ de duc ti on : seven_objects ' , ' lo gi ca l_ ded uc ti on :
three_objects ', ' novel_concepts ' , ' operators ', ' parsinlu_reading_comprehension ', '
play_dialog_same_or_different ', ' strange_stories : boolean ' , ' strange_stories : multiple_choice ' , '
strategyqa ', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : adversarial', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : emoji_agnostic', '
s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : name_agnostic', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : plain', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : tricky'
, ' vitaminc_fact_verification ', ' winowhy '] ,
3 " bbhard " : [ ' causal_judgment ', ' date_understanding ' , ' disambiguation_qa ', ' dyck_languages ', '
f or m a l_ f a ll a c ie s _ sy l l og i s ms _ n eg a t io n' , ' geometric_shapes ' , ' hyperbaton ', ' l ogi ca l_ de du cti on :
five_objects ', ' lo gi ca l_ de duc ti on : seven_objects ', ' l ogi ca l_ de duc ti on : three_objects ' , '
movie_recommendation ', ' navigate ', ' object_counting ' , ' penguins_in_a_table ', '
reasoning_about_colored_objects ' , ' ruin_names ' , ' s al ie n t_ tr a ns la t io n_ e rr or _ de te c ti on', ' snarks ', '
sports_understanding ', ' temporal_sequences ' , ' t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : five_objects', '
t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : seven_objects' , ' t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : three_objects' , ' word_sorting '
]
4 }
G.2 Best of 5000
1 {
2 4 : [ ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', ' go al _s te p_ wik ih ow : goal_inference ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
past_tense_irregular_json ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 7 _drop_answer_type_generation ' ] ,
3 8 : [ ' arithmetic : 4 _digit_multiplication ', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_medium' , ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a :
question_only ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_regular_json ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 5
_ m c t ac o _ q u e s t io n _ g e n e ra t i o n _ f re q u e n c y', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 4
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ m o d i f i c a t i o n _ o b j e c t', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 8 _qasc_combined_fact', '
physics '] ,
4 1 6 : [ ' arithmetic : 2 _digit_addition ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_multiplication ', ' arithmetic : 4 _digit_subtraction
', ' bbq_lite_json : bb q _l it e _j so n _g en d er _ id en t it y_ a mb ig ' , ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ d i s a m b i g' , ' caus e_and_ef fect : two_sentences ' , '
c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_medium', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : synthetic_medium' , ' gem : cs_restaurants ', '
g oal _s te p_ wi kih ow : goal_inference ', ' i nt er n at io n al _p h on et i c_ al p ha be t _n l i' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
plural_regular_json ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 5
_ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 6
_ q a s c _ t o p i c _ w o r d _ t o _ g e n e r a t e _ r e l a t e d _ f a c t', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 5
_multirc_write_incorrect_answer ' , ' social_iqa ' ] ,
5 2 4 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' arithmetic : 2 _digit_division ' , ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_division ' , ' arithmetic : 4
_digit_subtraction ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g', ' dyck_languages ' , '
e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_with_language_hint ', ' gem : asset ' , ' implicatures ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
plural_json ' , ' mathematical_induction ', ' mnist_ascii ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 4
_ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ a b s o l u t e _ t i m e p o i n t', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 7
_ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ f r e q u e n c y', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 4
_ e s s e n t i a l _ t e r m s _ i d e n t i f y i n g _ e s s e n t i a l _ w o r d s', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 6 0
_ropes_question_generation ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 6 1 _ropes_answer_generation ' , ' navigate ',
' nonsense_words_grammar ', ' persian_idioms ' , ' social_iqa ' , ' strange_stories : multiple_choice ', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates', ' winowhy '] ,
6 3 2 : [ ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 4 _distractors', ' arithmetic : 2 _digit_division ' , ' arithmetic : 2
_digit_subtraction ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_addition ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_division ', ' arithmetic : 4
_digit_division ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ g e n d e r _ i d e n t i t y _ d i s a m b i g', ' br id gi ng _a nap ho ra _r es olu ti on _b ar qa ' , '
c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : synthetic_long', ' common_morpheme ', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a :
question_with_mathematical_hint ' , ' epistemic_reasoning ', ' gem : cs_restaurants ' , '
identify_math_theorems ' , ' implicatures ', ' i n te r s ec t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4', ' kannada ', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json', ' l ogi ca l_ de duc ti on :
three_objects ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 5 _ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 3 _ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ a b s o l u t e _ t i m e p o i n t', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s
: subtask 0 2 0 _mctaco_span_based_question ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 3
_cosmosqa_question_generation ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 5
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ m o d i f i c a t i o n _ p e r s o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5
_ mi s c el l a ne o u s_ s e nt e n ce _ p ar a p hr a s in g' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 4
_multirc_write_correct_answer ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 6 _mul tirc_cla ssify_co rrect_an swer ' ,
' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 0', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_to_natural_content' ] ,


===== PAGE 22 =====
7 4 2 : [ ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 9 _distractors', ' analogical_similarity ' , ' arithmetic : 2
_digit_multiplication ', ' arithmetic : 2 _digit_subtraction ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_division ', '
arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_age_disambig ' , ' cause _and_eff ect :
two_sentences ', ' color : hsl ', ' cs_algorithms : lcs ', ' cs_algorithms : valid_parentheses ' , '
e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : language_hint_only ', ' english_russian_proverbs ' , ' fantasy_reasoning ', ' gem :
webnlg_en ', ' gem : webnlg_ru ', ' human_organs_senses ', ' intent_recognition ' , ' i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y :
shapes_ 3 ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json', ' m e t a p h o r _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : met 2 lit', ' mnist_ascii ', '
m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c : three_digit_addition_control ' , ' movie_recommendation ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 0 7 _ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ t r a n s i e n t _ s t a t i o n a r y' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 6
_ mc ta c o_ an s we r_ g en er a ti on _ fr eq u en cy', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 4 _cosmosqa_answer_generation ',
' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 6 _drop_question_generation ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 4
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ m o d i f i c a t i o n _ o b j e c t', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 7
_qasc_generate_related_fact ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 7 _ misc _an swe ring _sc ienc e_q ues tion s', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m ul t ir c_ q ue st i on s_ n ee de d _t o _a ns w er', ' paragraph_segmentation ', '
question_selection ', ' simple_ethical_questions ', ' social_iqa ', ' strange_stories : boolean ', '
swedish_to_german_proverbs ', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : tricky', ' t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s :
five_objects ', ' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 3', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : u n n a t u r a l _ a d d i t i o n _ 2 _digit
'] ,
8 }
G.3 Greedy Search
1 {
2 4 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ' , ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s
: subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli '] ,
3 8 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ' , ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s
: subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_division ', '
e va lu a ti ng _ in fo r ma ti o n_ es s en ti a li ty', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
plural_regular_json ' ] ,
4 1 6 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli ', ' arithmetic :
5 _digit_division ' , ' e va lu a ti ng _ in fo r ma ti o n_ es s en ti a li ty', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_regular_json' , ' gem : wikilingua_en ', ' gem : common_gen ', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_subtraction ', ' ruin_names ', ' gem : asset ' , ' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 2', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ li t e _ j s o n _d i s a b i l it y _ s t a t us _ a m b i g', ' physics ' ] ,
5 2 4 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli ', ' arithmetic :
5 _digit_division ' , ' e va lu a ti ng _ in fo r ma ti o n_ es s en ti a li ty', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_regular_json' , ' gem : wikilingua_en ', ' gem : common_gen ', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_subtraction ', ' ruin_names ', ' gem : asset ' , ' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 2', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ li t e _ j s o n _d i s a b i l it y _ s t a t us _ a m b i g', ' physics ' , ' re al _o r_ fak e_ te xt : easy ', ' strange_stories :
multiple_choice ', ' penguins_in_a_table ', ' nonsense_words_grammar ', ' c o n c e p t u a l _ c o m b i n a t i o n s :
emergent_properties ' , ' code_line_description ', ' logical_sequence ', ' hhh_alignment : Helpfulness ' ] ,
6 3 2 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli ', ' arithmetic :
5 _digit_division ' , ' e va lu a ti ng _ in fo r ma ti o n_ es s en ti a li ty', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_regular_json' , ' gem : wikilingua_en ', ' gem : common_gen ', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_subtraction ', ' ruin_names ', ' gem : asset ' , ' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 2', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ li t e _ j s o n _d i s a b i l it y _ s t a t us _ a m b i g', ' physics ' , ' re al _o r_ fak e_ te xt : easy ', ' strange_stories :
multiple_choice ', ' penguins_in_a_table ', ' nonsense_words_grammar ', ' c o n c e p t u a l _ c o m b i n a t i o n s :
emergent_properties ' , ' code_line_description ', ' logical_sequence ', ' hhh_alignment : Helpfulness ' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : pronoun_replacement_json ', ' gem : xsum ' , ' cs_algorithms : lcs ', '
c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_long', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates', ' entailed_polarity_hindi ' ,
' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 3
_cosmosqa_question_generation '] ,
7 4 2 : [ ' gem : cs_restaurants ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', ' presuppositions_as_nli ', ' arithmetic :
5 _digit_division ' , ' e va lu a ti ng _ in fo r ma ti o n_ es s en ti a li ty', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_regular_json' , ' gem : wikilingua_en ', ' gem : common_gen ', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_subtraction ', ' ruin_names ', ' gem : asset ' , ' u n i t _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : lv 2', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ li t e _ j s o n _d i s a b i l it y _ s t a t us _ a m b i g', ' physics ' , ' re al _o r_ fak e_ te xt : easy ', ' strange_stories :
multiple_choice ', ' penguins_in_a_table ', ' nonsense_words_grammar ', ' c o n c e p t u a l _ c o m b i n a t i o n s :
emergent_properties ' , ' code_line_description ', ' logical_sequence ', ' hhh_alignment : Helpfulness ' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : pronoun_replacement_json ', ' gem : xsum ' , ' cs_algorithms : lcs ', '
c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_long', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates', ' entailed_polarity_hindi ' ,
' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 3
_cosmosqa_question_generation ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 4
_ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', ' question_selection ' , ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t :
additional_set_ 1 ', ' matrixshapes ', ' movie_dialog_same_or_different ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0
2 1 _mctaco_grammatical_logical ', ' arithmetic : 4 _digit_division ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 6 1
_ropes_answer_generation ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c : three_digit_subtraction_control ' , '
date_understanding ']
8 }
G.4 Beam Search (q=4, p=1/4)
1 {
2 4 : [ ' implicatures ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m ul t ir c_ q ue st i on s_ n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 5
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ m o d i f i c a t i o n _ p e r s o n'] ,
3 8 : [ ' implicatures ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m ul t ir c_ q ue st i on s_ n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 7
_ mul ti rc _c la ssi fy _i nc orr ec t_ an sw er ' , ' gem : e 2 e_nlg ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : seven_objects ' , ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig '] ,


===== PAGE 23 =====
4 1 6 : [ ' implicatures ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m u lt ir c _q ue s ti on s _n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 7
_ mul ti rc _c la ssi fy _i nc orr ec t_ an sw er ' , ' gem : e 2 e_nlg ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : seven_objects ' , ' cryobiology_spanish ', ' vitaminc_fact_verification ', ' qa_wikidata
', ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 4 _distractors', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json' , '
s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : emoji_agnostic' , ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_with_mathematical_hint ' , '
s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_only '] ,
5 2 4 : [ ' implicatures ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m u lt ir c _q ue s ti on s _n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 7
_ mul ti rc _c la ssi fy _i nc orr ec t_ an sw er ' , ' gem : e 2 e_nlg ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : seven_objects ' , ' cryobiology_spanish ', ' vitaminc_fact_verification ', ' qa_wikidata
', ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 4 _distractors', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json' , '
s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : emoji_agnostic' , ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_with_mathematical_hint ' , '
s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_only ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 0 4 _ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', ' empirical_judgments ' , '
gre_reading_comprehension ' , ' lo gi ca l_ ded uc ti on : three_objects ', ' arithmetic : 4 _digit_subtraction ', '
hhh_alignment : Harms ' , ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 2 5 _ c o s m o s q a_ i n c o r r ec t _ a n s w er _ g e n e r a ti o n'] ,
6 3 2 : [ ' implicatures ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m u lt ir c _q ue s ti on s _n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 7
_ mul ti rc _c la ssi fy _i nc orr ec t_ an sw er ' , ' gem : e 2 e_nlg ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : seven_objects ' , ' cryobiology_spanish ', ' vitaminc_fact_verification ', ' qa_wikidata
', ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 4 _distractors', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json' , '
s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : emoji_agnostic' , ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_with_mathematical_hint ' , '
s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_only ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 0 4 _ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', ' empirical_judgments ' , '
gre_reading_comprehension ' , ' lo gi ca l_ ded uc ti on : three_objects ', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a :
language_hint_only ', ' cifar 1 0 _classification : base 6 4 ', ' mathematical_induction ', ' arithmetic : 2
_digit_subtraction ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : identity', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 4
_multirc_write_correct_answer ', ' logical_sequence ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_multiplication ', '
persian_idioms ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_regular_json ', ' p eri od ic _e lem en ts : subtask_ 1 ', '
parsinlu_reading_comprehension '] ,
7 4 2 : [ ' implicatures ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m u lt ir c _q ue s ti on s _n ee d ed _t o _a ns w er' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 7
_ mul ti rc _c la ssi fy _i nc orr ec t_ an sw er ' , ' gem : e 2 e_nlg ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_subtraction ', '
l ogi ca l_ de du cti on : seven_objects ' , ' cryobiology_spanish ', ' vitaminc_fact_verification ', ' qa_wikidata
', ' a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 4 _distractors', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : plural_json' , '
s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : emoji_agnostic' , ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_with_mathematical_hint ' , '
s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 2', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a : question_only ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 0 4 _ m c t a c o _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', ' empirical_judgments ' , '
gre_reading_comprehension ' , ' lo gi ca l_ ded uc ti on : three_objects ', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a :
language_hint_only ', ' cifar 1 0 _classification : base 6 4 ', ' mathematical_induction ', ' arithmetic : 2
_digit_subtraction ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : identity', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 4
_multirc_write_correct_answer ', ' logical_sequence ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_multiplication ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 5 _multirc_write_incorrect_answer ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 4
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ m o d i f i c a t i o n _ o b j e c t', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_addition ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 1 6 _ mc t ac o_ a ns we r _g en e ra ti o n_ fr e qu en c y' , ' language_identification ', ' crass_ai ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 0 _multirc_answerability ' , ' persian_idioms ' , ' disambiguation_qa ', ' gem
: asset ', ' dark_humor_detection ', ' arithmetic : 4 _digit_addition ', '
i nt er n at io n al _p h on et i c_ al p ha be t _n li', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 8
_ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ t r a n s i e n t _ s t a t i o n a r y']
8 }
G.5 k-means
The numbers reported in Fig. 6 is the average of 5 runs. We ran the k-means algorithms with 5 different
random initialization. In the following we list the “small-bench” candidates from 1 run. The same applies
to “k-means + Task Value” results.
1 {
2 4 : [ ' anachronisms ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 2 _ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ p e r s o n', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : de_past_tense_regular_json ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 3
_winogrande_answer_generation '] " ,
3 8 : [ ' anachronisms ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 6 _drop_question_generation ' , ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_addition ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : question_formation_json ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 0
_winogrande_full_person ', ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_ses_disambig ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask
0 3 9 _qasc_find_overlapping_words ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : de_past_tense_regular_json '] " ,
4 1 6 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : plain' , ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
past_tense_regular_json ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 1 _ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ o b j e c t' ,
' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_ses_disambig ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 9
_qasc_find_overlapping_words ' , ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c : t wo_ digi t_m ult ipli cat ion_ plu s_o ne' , '
bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ' , ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_medium', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : de_past_tense_regular_json ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 2
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ p e r s o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 1 _qasc_answer_generation ' ,
' gem : turk ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0
4 8 _multirc_question_generation '] " ,
5 2 4 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : easy ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' gem : webnlg_en ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m ul t ir c_ q ue st i on s_ n ee de d _t o _a ns w er', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
past_tense_regular_json ', ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ', ' gem : xsum ', '
t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : seven_objects' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 9
_ mc ta c o_ te m po ra l _r ea s on in g _c at e go ry', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 4 _cosmosqa_answer_generation ',
' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 0 _winogrande_full_person ' , ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : synthetic_medium',
' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5 _m i s ce l l an e o us _ s en t e nc e _ pa r a ph r a si n g', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_to_natural_content' , ' a u t h o r s h i p _ v e r i f i c a t i o n : swapped' , '


===== PAGE 24 =====
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 9 _qasc_find_overlapping_words ' , ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c :
two_ digit_mu ltiplica tion_con trol ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g', '
a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 9 _distractors', ' color : hsl ' , ' fact_checker : fever ', ' tense ' , '
i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4'] " ,
6 3 2 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : easy ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_division ', ' gem : webnlg_en ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 9 _m ul t ir c_ q ue st i on s_ n ee de d _t o _a ns w er', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
past_tense_json ', ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ', ' gem : xsum ' , '
t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : seven_objects' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 0
_mctaco_span_based_question ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 2
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ p e r s o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 2
_ w i n o g r a n d e _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ p e r s o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 3
_ m c t a c o _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5
_ mi s c el l a ne o u s_ s e nt e n ce _ p ar a p hr a s in g' , ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_natural_content' , '
a u t h o r s h i p _ v e r i f i c a t i o n : swapped' , ' go al _s te p_w ik ih ow : goal_inference ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c :
two_ digit_mu ltiplica tion_con trol ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g', '
a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 9 _distractors', ' color : hsl ' , ' fact_checker : fever ', ' tense ' , '
i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 8 _multirc_question_generation ' , ' hyperbaton ' , ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n :
plain ' , ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ' , ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_medium', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t :
additional_set_ 1 ', ' physics '] " ,
7 4 2 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : easy ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_division ', ' gem : webnlg_en ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 3 9 _qasc_find_overlapping_words ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json'
, ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_nationality_ambig ' , ' gem : xsum ', ' t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s :
seven_objects ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 9 _m ct a co _t e mp or a l_ re a so ni n g_ ca t eg o ry', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 7 _ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ f r e q u e n c y', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s :
subtask 0 3 0 _winogrande_full_person ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 3
_ m c t a c o _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5
_ mi s c el l a ne o u s_ s e nt e n ce _ p ar a p hr a s in g' , ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_natural_content' , '
a u t h o r s h i p _ v e r i f i c a t i o n : swapped' , ' go al _s te p_w ik ih ow : goal_inference ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c :
two_ digit_mu ltiplica tion_con trol ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ d i s a m b i g', '
a b s t r a c t _ n a r r a t i v e _ u n d e r s t a n d i n g : 9 _distractors', ' color : hex ' , ' fact_checker : fever ', ' tense ' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : de_past_tense_regular_json ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g :
dates_unnatural_content ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 6 _drop_question_generation ', ' hyperbaton ',
' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : plain', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_medium' ,
' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 1', ' physics ' , ' cifar 1 0 _classification : base 6 4 ', '
i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4', ' e l em e n ta r y _m a th _ q a : question_with_language_hint ', ' go al _s te p_ wik ih ow :
step_inference ' , ' unit_conversion : unit_identification ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 6
_mul tirc_cla ssify_co rrect_an swer ', ' strange_stories : multiple_choice ', ' discourse_marker_prediction '
, ' bbq_lite_json : bbq_lite_json_religion_disambig ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 4
_cosmosqa_answer_generation '] "
8 }
G.6 k-means + Task Value
1 {
2 4 : [ ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 9
_winogrande_full_object ', ' gem : xsum ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : question_formation_json ' ] " ,
3 8 : [ ' hyperbaton ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 6 _drop_question_generation ', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_addition ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : question_formation_json ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 9
_winogrande_full_object ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g' , '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 3 _ m c t a c o _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n' , ' gem : xsum ' ] " ,
4 1 6 : [ ' hyperbaton ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : gpt 2 _xl ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s :
past_tense_regular_json ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 9 _winogrande_full_object ', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g', ' go al _s te p_ wik ih ow : goal_inference ', ' pe ri od ic _e lem en ts :
subtask_ 1 ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g :
synthetic_long ' , ' i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 5
_ c o s mo s q a _ i n c or r e c t _ a ns w e r _ g e ne r a t i o n', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 2 _quoref_answer_generation ',
' gem : turk ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask
0 4 8 _multirc_question_generation ' ] " ,
5 2 4 : [ ' snarks ' , ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : gpt 2 _xl ', ' arithmetic : 5 _digit_addition ', ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t :
additional_set_ 2 ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 8 _multirc_question_generation ' , '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_regular_json ', ' bbq_lite_json :
b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g' , ' gem : xsum ' , ' analogical_similarity ' , '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 9 _m ct a co _t e mp or a l_ re a so ni n g_ c at eg o ry', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0
2 5 _ c os m o s q a _ i nc o r r e c t _a n s w e r _ ge n e r a t i o n' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 9 _winogrande_full_object ',
' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : real_short', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5
_ mi s c el l a ne o u s_ s e nt e n ce _ p ar a p hr a s in g' , ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_to_natural_content' ,
' hyperbaton ' , ' go al _s te p_w ik ih ow : goal_inference ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c :
two_ digit_mu ltiplica tion_con trol ', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g', '
nonsense_words_grammar ' , ' discourse_marker_prediction ', ' implicatures ', ' ascii_word_recognition ', '
i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4'] " ,
6 3 2 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : gpt 2 _xl ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_division ', '
play_dialog_same_or_different ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 8 _multirc_question_answering ', '
l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g', ' gem
: xsum ' , ' analogical_similarity ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 0 _mctaco_span_based_question ', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 5 _ c o sm o s q a _ i nc o r r e c t _ an s w e r _ g en e r a t i o n' , ' m i n u t e _ m y s t e r i e s _ q a :
multiplechoice ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 3 _ m c t a c o _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5 _ mi s ce l l an e o us _ s en t e nc e _ pa r a ph r a si n g', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_to_natural_content' , ' a u t h o r s h i p _ v e r i f i c a t i o n : swapped' , '
g oal _s te p_ wi kih ow : goal_inference ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c : tw o_digit_ multipli cation_c ontrol ' , '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ s e x u a l _ o r i e n t a t i o n _ d i s a m b i g', ' figure_of_speech_detection ' , '
discourse_marker_prediction ', ' implicatures ', ' ascii_word_recognition ', ' i n te r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_
4 ', ' u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 8
_multirc_question_generation ' , ' hyperbaton ' , ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : plain' , ' arithmetic : 5


===== PAGE 25 =====
_digit_addition ', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : synthetic_long' , ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 1', '
human_organs_senses ' ] " ,
7 4 2 : [ ' anachronisms ', ' re al _o r_ fa ke_ te xt : gpt 2 _xl ', ' arithmetic : 3 _digit_division ', '
play_dialog_same_or_different ', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 7 _ misc _an swe ring _sc ienc e_q ues tion s',
' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : past_tense_json', ' bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ a m b i g', '
gem : xsum ' , ' t r a c k i n g _ s h u f f l e d _ o b j e c t s : seven_objects' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 9
_ mc ta c o_ te m po ra l _r ea s on in g _c at e go ry', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 1 7
_ m c t a c o _ w r o n g _ a n s w e r _ g e n e r a t i o n _ f r e q u e n c y', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 9 _winogrande_full_object
', ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 0 3 _ m c t a c o _ q u e s t i o n _ g e n e r a t i o n _ e v e n t _ d u r a t i o n', '
n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 4 5 _ mi s ce l l an e o us _ s en t e nc e _ pa r a ph r a si n g', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : reverse_to_natural_content' , ' a u t h o r s h i p _ v e r i f i c a t i o n : swapped' , '
g oal _s te p_ wi kih ow : goal_inference ', ' m o d i f i e d _ a r i t h m e t i c : tw o_digit_ multipli cation_c ontrol ' , '
bbq_lite_json : b b q _ l i t e _ j s o n _ p h y s i c a l _ a p p e a r a n c e _ d i s a m b i g' , ' figure_of_speech_detection ', ' color : hex
', ' implicatures ' , ' ascii_word_recognition ' , ' l i n g u i s t i c _ m a p p i n g s : de_past_tense_regular_json ', '
u n n a t u r a l _ i n _ c o n t e x t _ l e a r n i n g : dates_unnatural_content' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 6
_drop_question_generation ' , ' hyperbaton ' , ' s y m b o l _ i n t e r p r e t a t i o n : plain', ' arithmetic : 5
_digit_addition ', ' c h e s s _ s t a t e _ t r a c k i n g : synthetic_long' , ' s i m p _ t u r i n g _ c o n c e p t : additional_set_ 1', '
physics ', ' cifar 1 0 _classification : base 6 4 ', ' i nt e r se c t _g e o me t r y : shapes_ 4', ' e le m e nt a r y_ m a th _ q a :
question_with_language_hint ', ' g oal _s te p_ wik ih ow : step_inference ', ' unit_conversion :
unit_identification ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 5 6 _mu ltirc_cl assify_c orrect_a nswer ', '
strange_stories : boolean ', ' discourse_marker_prediction ', ' bbq_lite_json :
bbq_lite_json_religion_disambig ' , ' n a t u r a l _ i n s t r u c t i o n s : subtask 0 2 5
_ c o s mo s q a _ i n c or r e c t _ a ns w e r _ g e ne r a t i o n'] "